# The Decentralisation of Industries (*continued*)


CHAPTER II. 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES— (continued). 

Italy and Spain---India---Japan---The United States---The cotton, wool and silk trades---The growing necessity for each country to rely chiefly upon home consumers. 

The flow of industrial growths spreads, however, not only east; it moves also south-east and south. Austria and Hungary are rapidly gaining ground in the race for industrial importance. The Triple Alliance has already been menaced by the growing tendency of Austrian manufacturers to protect themselves against German competition; and even the dual monarchy has recently seen its two sister nations quarrelling about customs duties. Austrian industries are a modern growth, and still they show a yearly return which exceeds ;^ 1 00,000,000. Bohemia, in a few decades, has grown to be an industrial country of considerable importance; and the excellence and originality of the machinery used in the newly reformed flour-mills of Hungary show that the young industry of Hungary is on the right road, not only to become a competitor to her elder sisters, but also to add her share to our knowledge as to the use of the forces of nature. Let me add, by the way, that the same is true to some extent with regard to Finland. Figures are wanting as to the present state of the aggregate industries of Austria-Hungary; but the relatively low imports of manufactured goods are worthy of note. For British manufacturers Austria-Hungary is, in fact, no customer worth speaking of; but even with 

(22) 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 23 

regard to Germany she is rapidly emancipating herself from her former dependence. (See Appendix F.) 

The same industrial progress extends over the southern peninsulas. Who would have spoken twenty years ago about Italian manufactures? And yet---the Turin Exhibition of 1884 has shown it---Italy ranks now among the manufacturing countries. " You see everywhere a considerable industrial and commercial effort made," wrote a French economist to the Temps. " Italy aspires to go on without foreign produce. The patriotic watchword is, Italy all by herself! It inspires the whole mass of producers. There is not a single manufacturer or tradesman, who, even in the most trifling circumstances, does not do his best to emancipate himself from foreign guardianship." The best French and English patterns are imitated and improved by a touch of national genius and artistic traditions. Complete statistics are wanting, so that the statistical Annuario resorts to indirect indications. But the rapid increase of imports of coal (9,000,000 tons in 1896, as against 779,000 tons in 1 87 1 ); the grow th of the mining industries, which have trebled their production during the last fifteen years; the increasing production of steel and machmery (nearly ^^"3,000,000 in 1886), which---to use Bovio's words---shows how a country having no fuel nor minerals of her own can have nevertheless a notable metallurgical industry; and, finally, the growth of textile industries disclosed by the net imports of raw cottons and the number of spindles having nearly doubled within five years *---all these show that the tendency towards becoming a manufacturing country capable of satisfying her needs by her own manufactures is not a mere dreanx As to the efforts made for 

* The net imports of raw cotton reached 291,680 quintals in 1880, and 594,118 in 1885. Number of spindles 1,800,000 in 1885, as against 1,000,000 in 1877. The whole industry has grown up since 1859. Net imports of pig-iron from 700,000 to 800,000 quintals during the five years 1881 to i88s. 

24 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

taking a more lively part in the trade of the world, who does not know the traditional capacities of the Italians in that direction? 

I ought also to mention Spain, whose textile, mining and metallurgical industries are rapidly growing; but I hasten to go over to countries which a few years ago were considered as eternal and obligatory customers to the manufacturing nations of Western Europe. Let us take, for instance, Brazil. Was it not doomed by economists to grow cotton, to export it in a raw state, and to receive cotton goods in exchange .' Twenty years ago its nine miserable manufactories could boast only of an aggregate of 385 spindles. But already in 1887 there were in Brazil 46 cotton manufactories, and five of them had already 40,000 spindles; while altogether their nearly 10,000 looms threw every year on the Brazilian markets more than 33,000,000 yards of cotton stuffs. Nay, even Vera Cruz, in Mexico, under the protection of customs officers, has begun to manufacture cottons, and boasted in 1887 its 40,200 spindles, 287,700 pieces of cotton cloth, and 212,000 lb. of yarn. Since that year progress has been steady, and in 1894 Vice-Consul Chapman reported that some of the finest machines are to be found at the Orizaba spinning mills, while " cotton prints," he wrote, " are now turned out as good if not superior to the imported article " * 

The flattest contradiction to the export theory has, however, been given by India. She was always considered as the surest customer for British cottons, and so she has been until now. Out of the total of cotton goods exported from Britain she used to buy more than one-quarter, very nearly one-third (from iJ^ 1 7,000,000 

* The Economist, 12th May, 1894, p. 9: "A few years ago the Orizaba mills used entirely imported raw cotton; but now they use home-grown and home-spun cotton as much as possible ". 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 2$ 

to;£^2 2,000,000, out of an aggregate of about ;£^75,ooo,ooo in the last decade, and from i^i6, 100,000 to i^i 8,242,000 dtiring the years 1893 and 1894). But things have begun to change. The Indian cotton manufactures, which---for some causes not fully explained---were so unsuccessful at their beginnings, suddenly took firm root. 

In i860 they consumed only 23,000,000 lb. of raw ■cotton, but the quantity was nearly four times as much in 1887, and it trebled again within the next ten years: 283,000,000 lb. of raw cotton were used in 1887-88. The number of cotton mills grew up from 40 in 1877 to 147 in 1895; the number of spindles rose from 886,100 to 3,844,300 in the same years; and where 57,188 workers were employed in 1887, we find, seven years later,' 146,240 operatives; while the capital engaged in cotton mills and presses by joint-stock companies rose from 7,000,000 tens of rupees in 1882 to 14,600,000 in 1895.* As for the quality of the mills, the blue-books praise them; the German chambers of commerce state that the best spinning mills in Bombay " do not now stand far behind the best German ones "; and two great authorities in the cotton industry, Mr. James Piatt and Mr. Henry Lee, agree in saying " that in no •other country of the earth except in Lancashire do the operatives possess such a natural leaning to the textile industry as in India ".t 

The exports of cotton twist from India more than doubled in five years (18821887), and already in 1887 we could read in the Statement (p. 62) that " what cotton twist was imported was less and less of the coarser and even medium kind, which indicates that the Indian (spinning) mills are gradually gaining hold of the home markets ". Consequently, while India con

* Ten rupees are, as is known, nearly equal to £1 sterling, t Schulze Gawernitz, The Cotton Trade, etc., p. 123. 

26 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

tinued to import nearly the same amount of British cotton goods (sHghtly reduced since), she threw already then (in 1887) on the foreign markets no less than ^3.635.510 worth of her own cottons of Lancashire patterns; she exported 33,000,000 yards of grey cotton piece goods manufactured in India with Indian workmen. And the export has continued to grow since, so that in the years 1891-93, 73,000,000 to 80,000,000 yards of cotton piece goods were exported,* as well as from 161,000,000 to 189,000,000 lb. of yarn. Finally, in 1897, the value of the yarns and textiles exported reached the respectable figure of 14,073,600 tens of rupees. 

The jute factories in India have grown at a still speedier rate.t and the once flourishing jute trade of Dundee was brought to decay, not only by the high tariffs of continental powers, but also by Indian competition. Even woollen mills have lately been started, while the iron industry took a sudden development in India, since the means were found, after many experiments and failures, to work furnaces with local coal. In a few years, we are told by specialists, India will be selfsupporting for iron. Nay, it is not without apprehension that the English manufacturers see that the imports of Indian manufactured textiles to this country are steadily growing, while in the markets of the Far East and Africa India becomes a serious competitor to the mother country. But why should she not? What might prevent the growth of Indian manufactures } Is 

* 312,000 bales were exported to China and Japan in 1893, instead of 112,100 bales ten years before. 

t In 1882 they had 5633 looms and 95,937 spindles. Two years later (1884-85) they had already 6926 looms and 131,740 spindles, giving occupation to 51,900 persons. Now, or rather in 1895, the twenty-eight jute mills of India have 10,580 looms and 216,140 spindles (doubled in twelve years) and thej' employ a daily average number of 78,889 persons. The progress realised in the machinery is best seen from these figures. The exports of jute stuffs from India were;^i,543,87o in 1884-85 and ;^5, 213,900 in 1895. (See Appendix H.) 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 2/ 

it the want of capital? But capital knows no fatherland; and if high profits can be derived from the work of Indian coolies whose wages are only one-half of those of English workmen, or even less, capital will migrate to India, as it has gone to Russia, although its migration may mean starvation for Lancashire and Dundee. Is it the want of knowledge? But longitudes and latitudes are no obstacle to its spreading; it is only the first steps that are difficult. As to the superiority of workmanship, nobody who knows the Hindoo worker will doubt about his capacities. Surely they are not below those of the 86,500 children less than thirteen years of age, or the 363,000 boys and girls less than eighteen years old, who are employed in the British textile manufactories.* 

Ten years surely are not much in the life of nations. And yet within the last ten years another powerful competitor has grown in the East. I mean Japan. In October, 1888, the Textile Recorder mentioned m a few lines that the annual production of yarns in the cotton mills of Japan had attained 9,498,500 lb., and that fifteen more mills, which would hold 156,100 spindles, were in course of erection, t Two years later, 25,000,000 lb. of yarn were spun in Japan; and while in 1886-88 Japan imported five or six times as much yarn from abroad as was spun at home, next year twothirds only of the total consumption of the country were imported from abroad.+ From that date the production 

* The number of boys above thirteen but under eighteen, working full time, was, in the year iSgo, 86,998. The number of girls of that age is not given; they are considered as " women," and work full time. But the proportion of women to men being as two to one in the textile factories of the United Kingdom, the number of girls of that age (thirteen to eighteen) may be taken as twice the number of boys, that is, about 190,000. This would give a total of at least 363,000 boys and girls less than eighteen years of age, out of a total of 1,084,630 operatives employed in all the textile trades of the United Kingdom. More than one-third. {State inlands Year-book for 1898, p. 75.) 

t Textile Recorder, 15th October, 1888. 

X 17,778,000 kilogrammes of yarn were imported in 1886 as against 2,919,000 kilogrammes of home-spun yarn. In 1889 the figures were: 25,687,000 kilogrammes imported and 12,160,000 kilogrammes home-spun. 

28 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS, 

grew up regularly. From 6,503,300 lb. in 1886, it reached 91,950,000 lb. in 1893, and 153,444,000 lb. in 1895. In nine years it had thus increased twenty-four times. The total production of tissues, valued at i^ 1,200,000 in the year 1887, rapidly rose to i^ 14,270,000 in 1895---cottons entering into the amount to the extent of nearly two-fifths. Consequently, the imports of foreign cotton goods from Europe fell from i^ 1,640,000 in 1884 to;^849,6oo in 1895, while the exports of silk goods rose to iJ"3, 246,000. Moreover, the coal and iron industries grow so rapidly that Japan will not long remain a tributary to Europe for iron goods; nay, the ambition of the Japanese is to have their own shipbuilding yards, and last summer 300 engineers left the Elswick works of Mr. Armstrong in order to start shipbuilding in Japan. But they were engaged for five years only. In five years the Japanese expect to have learned enough to be their own shipbuilders.* As to such plain things as matches, the industry, after its failure in 1884, has risen again, and in 1895 the Japanese exported over 15,000,000 gross of matches valued at;£"i, 246,550. 

All this shows that the much-dreaded invasion of the East upon European markets is in rapid progress. The Chinese slumber still; but I am firmly persuaded from what I saw of China, that the moment they will begin to manufacture with the aid of European machinery---and the first steps have already been made---they will do it with more success, and necessarily on a far greater scale, than even the Japanese. 

But what about the United States, which cannot be accused of employing cheap labour or of sending to Europe " cheap and nasty " produce? Their great 

* The mining industry has grown as follows: Copper extracted: 2407 tons in 1875; 11,064 in 1887. Coal: 567,200 tons in 1875; 1,669,700 twelve years later; 4,259,000 in 1894. Iron: 3447 tons in 1875; 15,268 in 1887; over 20,000 in 1894. (K. Rathgen, Japan's Volkwirthschaft und Staatshaushaltung, Leipzig, 1891; Consular Reports.) 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 29 

industry is of yesterday's date; and yet the States already send to old Europe constantly increasing quantities of machinery, while this year they began even to send iron. In the course of twenty years (1870-90) the number of persons employed in the American manufactures has more than doubled, and the value of their produce has nearly trebled.* The cotton industry, supplied with excellent home-made machinery,t is rapidly developing, and the exports of cottons of domestic manufacture attained last year about;^2, 800,000. As to the yearly output of pig-iron and steel, it is already in excess of the yearly output in Britain, + and the organisation of that industry is also superior, as Mr. Berkley pointed out in November, 1891, in his address to the Institute of Civil Engineers.§ 

But all this has grown almost entirely within the last twenty or thirty years---whole industries having been created entirely since i860. || What will, then, American industry be twenty years hence, aided as it is by a wonderful development of technical skill, by excellent schools, a scientific education which goes hand in hand with technical education, and a spirit of enterprise which is unrivalled in Europe ^ 

Volumes have been written about the crisis of 188687, a crisis which, to use the words of the Parliamentary Commission, lasted since 1875, with but "a short 

•Workers employed in industries: 2,054,000 in 1870; 4,712,600 in i8go. Value of produce: 3,385,861,000 dollars in 1870, and 9,372,437,280 dollars in 1890. Yearly production per head of workers: 1648 dollars in 1870, and 1989 dollars in 1890. 

f Textile Recorder. 

i It was from 7,255,076 to 9,811,620 tons of pig-iron during the years 1890-94; 4,051,260 tons of "Bessemer and Clapp-Griffiths steel" were obtained in 1890. 

§ " The largest output of one blast-furnace in Great Britain does not exceed 750 tons in the week, while in America it had reached 2000 tons " (Nature, 19th Nov., 1891, p. 65). 

I! J. R. Dodge, Farvi and Factory: Aids to Agriculture from other Industries, New York and London^ 1884, p. in. I can but highly recommend this little work to those interested in the question. 

so FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

period of prosperity enjoyed by certain branches of trade in the years 1880 to 1883," and a crisis, I shall add, which extended over all the chief manufacturing countries of the world. All possible causes of the crisis have been examined; but, whatever the cacophony of conclusions arrived at, all unanimously agreed upon one, namely, that of the Parliamentary Commission, which could be summed up as follows: " The manufacturing countries do not find such customers as would enable them to realise high profits ". Profits being the basis of capitalist industry, low profits explain all ulterior consequences. Low profits induce the employers to reduce the wages, or the number of workers, or the number of days of employment during the week, or eventually compel them to resort to the manufacture of lower kinds of goods, which, as a rule, are paid worse than the higher sorts. As Adam Smith said, low profits ultimately mean a reduction of wages, and low wages mean a reduced consumption by the worker. Low profits mean also a somewhat reduced consumption by the employer; and both together mean lower profits and reduced consumption with that immense class of middlemen which has grown up in manufacturing countries, and that, again, means a further reduction of profits for the employers. 

A country which manufactures chiefly for export, and therefore lives chiefly on the profits derived from her foreign trade, stands very much in the same position as Switzerland, which lives to a great extent on the profits derived from the foreigners who visit her lakes and glaciers. A good " season " means an influx of from ;^ 1, 000,000 to ^^2,000, 000 of money imported by the tourists, and a bad " season " has the effects of a bad crop in an agricultural country: a general impoverishment follows. So it is also with a country which manufactures for export. If the " season " is bad, and the exported goods cannot be sold abroad for twice their 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 3 1 

value at home, the country which hves chiefly on these bargains suffers. Low profits for the innkeepers of the Alps mean narrowed circumstances in large parts of Switzerland; and low profits for the Lancashire and Scotch manufacturers, and the wholesale exporters, mean narrowed circumstances in Great Britain. The cause is the same in both cases. 

For many decades past we had not seen such a cheapness of wheat and manufactured goods as we saw lately, and yet the country was suffering from a crisis. People said, of course, that the cause of the crisis was over-production. But over-production is a word utterly devoid of sense if it does not mean that those who are in need of all kinds of produce have not the means for buying them with their low wages. Nobody would dare to affirm that there is too much furniture in the crippled cottages, too many bedsteads and bedclothes in the workmen's dwellings, too many lamps burning in the huts, and too much cloth on the shoulders, not only of those who used to sleep (in 1886) in Trafalgar Square between two newspapers, but even in those households where a silk hat makes a part of the Sunday dress. And nobody will dare to affirm that there is too much food in the homes of those agricultural labourers who earn twelve shillings a week, or of those women who earn from fivepence to sixpence a day in the clothing trade and other small industries which swarm in the outskirts of all great cities. Over-production means I _j/ merely and simply a want of purchasmg powers amidst | ^ the workers. And the same want of purchasing powers of the workers was felt everywhere on the Continent during the years 1885-87. 

After the bad years were over a sudden revival of international trade took place; and, as the British exports rose in four years (1886 to 1890) by nearly 24 per cent., it began to be said that there was no reason for being alarmed by foreign competition; that the 

32 

FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

^:y' 

decline of exports in 1885-87 was only temporary, and general in Europe; and that England, now as of old, fully maintained her dominant position in the international trade. It is certainly true that if we consider exclusively the money value of the exports for the years 1876 to 1895, we see no permanent decline, we notice only fluctuations. British exports, like commerce altogether, seem to show a certain periodicity. They fell from i^20 1, 000,000 sterling in 1876 to £"192,000,000 in 1879; then they rose again to;£24 1,000,000 in 1882, and fell down to iJ^2 13,000,000 in 1886; again they rose to ;^264,ooo,ooo in 1890, but fell again, reaching a minimum of;£2 1 6,000,000 in 1894, to be followed next year by a slight movement upwards. 

This periodicity being a fact, Mr. G iff en could make light of " German competition " by showing that exports from the United Kingdom had not decreased. It can even be said that, per head of population, they have remained what they were twenty years ago, notwithstanding all fluctuations.* However, when we come to consider the quantities exported, and compare them with the money values of the exports, even Mr. Giffen must acknowledge that the prices of 1883 were so low in comparison with those of 1873 that in order to reach the same money value the United Kingdom would have had to export four pieces of cotton instead of three, and eight or ten tons of metallic goods instead of six. " The aggregate of British foreign trade, if valued at the prices of ten years previously, would have amounted 

* Per head of population they appear, in shillings, as follows:---

1876 

I2IS. 

1886 

117s. 

1877 

119s. 

1887 

121S. 

1878 

114s. 

1888 

127s. 

1879 

112s. 

1889 

134s. 

1880 

129s. 

1890 

141S. 

I88I 

134s. 

1891 

131S. 

1882 

137s. 

1892 

119s. 

1883 

135s. 

1893 

114s. 

1884 

130S. 

1894 

Ills. 

1885 

1 1 8s. 

1895 

II2S. 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 33 

to;£^ 8 6 1, 000,000 instead of ^^667,000, 000," we were told by no less an authority than the Commission on Trade Depression. 

It might, however, be said that 1873 was an exceptional year, owing to the inflated demand which took place after the Franco-German war. But the same downward movement continues. In fact, if we take the figures given in the last Statesman s Y ear-book, we see that while the United Kingdom exported, in 1883, 4,957,000,000 yards of piece goods (cotton, woollen and linen) and 316,000,000 lb. of yarn in order to reach an export value of,^104,500,000, the same country had to export, in 1895, no less than 5,478,000,000 yards of the same stuffs and 330,000,000 lb. of yarn in order to realise;£"99, 700,000 only. As to the year 1894, which was a minimum year, the proportion was even still worse. And it would appear still worse again if we took the cottons alone, or made a comparison with the year i860, when 2,776,000,000 yards of cotton cloth and 197,000,000 lb. of cotton yarn were valued at iJ"5 2,000,000, while thirty-five years later almost twice as many million yards (5,033,000,000) and 252,000,000 lb. of yarn were required to make up ^^68,300,000.* And we must not forget that one-half (in value) of British and Irish exports is made up by textiles. 

We thus see that while the total value of the exports f from the United Kingdom remains, broadly speaking, unaltered for the last twenty years, the high prices which could be got for these exports twenty years ago, and with them the high profits, are irretrievably gone. And no amount of arithmetical calculations will persuade the British manufacturers that such is not the case. They know perfectly well that the home markets grow continually overstocked; that the best foreign markets are escaping; and that in the neutral markets Britain 

* Statesman's Year-book, 1896, p. 78. 

3 

34 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

is being undersold. This is the unavoidable consequence of the development of manufactures all over the world. (See Appendix G.) 

Great hopes are now laid in Australia as a market for British goods; but Australia will soon do what Canada already does. She will manufacture. And the last colonial exhibition, by showing to the " colonists " what they are able to do, and how they must do, will only have accelerated the day when each colony fara da se in her turn. Canada and India already impose protective duties on British goods. As to the much-spoken-of markets on the Congo, and Mr. Stanley's calculations and promises of a trade amounting to ;^2 6,000,000 a year if the Lancashire people supply the Africans with loin-cloths, such promises belong to the same category of fancies as the famous nightcaps of the Chinese which were to enrich England after the Chinese war. The Chinese prefer their own home-made nightcaps; and as to the Congo people, four countries at least are already competing for supplying them with their poor dress: Britain, Germany, the United States, and, last but not least, IndiaThere was a time when this country had almost the monopoly in the cotton industries; but about 1 880 she possessed only 55 per cent, of all the spindles at work in Europe, the United States and India (40,000,000 out of 72,000,000), and a little more than one-half of the looms (550,000 out of 972,000). In 1893 the proportion was still further reduced to 41 per cent of the spindles (45,300,000 out of 91,340,000).* She was thus losing ground while the others were winning. And the fact is quite natural: it might have been foreseen. There is no reason why Britain should always be the great cotton manufactory of the world, when raw cotton has to be imported into this country as elsewhere. It was 

* The Economist, 13th January, 1894. 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 35 

quite natural that France, Germany, Italy, Russia, India, Japan, the United States, and even Mexico and Brazil, should begin to spin their own yarns and to weave their own cotton stuffs. But the appearance of the cotton industry in a country, or in fact, of any textile industry, unavoidably becomes the starting-point for the growth of a series of other industries; chemical and mechanical works, metallurgy and mining feel at once the impetus given by a new want. The whole of the home industries, as also technical education altogether, must improve in order to satisfy that want as soon as it has been felt. 

What has happened with regard to cottons is going on also with regard to other industries. Britain and Belgium have no longer the monopoly of the woollen trade. Immense factories at Verviers are silent; the Belgian weavers are misery-stricken, while Germany yearly increases her production of woollens, and exports nine times more woollens than Belgium. Austria has her own woollens and exports them; Riga, Lodz, and Moscow supply Russia with fine woollen cloths; and the growth of the woollen industry in each of the lastnamed countries calls into existence hundreds of connected trades. 

For many years France has had the monopoly of the silk trade. Silkworms being reared in Southern France, it was quite natural that Lyons should grow into a centre for the manufacture of silks. Spinning, ■domestic weaving, and dyeing works developed to a great extent. But eventually the industry took such a development that home supplies of raw silk became insufficient, and raw silk was imported from Italy, Spain and Southern Austria, Asia Minor, the Caucasus and Japan, to the amount of from ^^9,000,000 to £\ 1,000,000 in 1875 and 1876, while France had only i^8oo,000 worth of her own silk. Thousands of peasant boys and girls 

36 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

were attracted by high wages to Lyons and the neighbouring district; the industry was prosperous. However, by-and-by new centres of silk trade grew up at Basel and in the peasant houses around Zurich. French emigrants imported the trade, and it developed, especially after the civil war of 1871. The Caucasus Administration invited French workmen and women from Lyons and ^Marseilles to teach the Georgians and the Russians the best means of rearing the silkworm, as well as the whole of the silk trade, and Stavropol became a new centre for silk weaving. Austria and the United States did the same; and what are now the results? During the years 1872 to 1881 Switzerland more than doubled the produce of her silk industry; Italy and Germany increased it by one-third; and the Lyons region, which formerly manufactured to the value of 454,000,000 francs a year, showed in 1887 a return of only 378,000,000. The exports of Lyons silks, which reached an average of 425,000,000 francs in 1855-59, and 460,000,000 in 1 870-74, fell down to 233,000,000 in 1887. And it is reckoned by French specialists that at present no less than one-third of the silk stuffs used in France are imported from Zurich, Crefeld, and Barmen. Nay, even Italy, which had 2,000,000 spindles and 30,000 looms in 1880 (as against 14,000 in 1870), sends her silks to France and competes with Lyons. The French manufacturers may cry as loudly as they like for protection, or resort to the production of cheaper goods of lower quality; they may sell 3,250,000 kilogrammes of silk stuffs at the same price as they sold 2.500,000 in 1855-59---they will never again regain the position they occupied before. Italy, Switzerland, Germany, the United States and Russia have their own silk factories and will import from Lyons only the highest qualities of stuffs. As to the lower sorts, a foulard has become a common attire with the St. Petersburg housemaids, because the North Caucasian 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 37 

domestic trades supply them at a price which would starve the Lyons weavers. The trade has been decentralised, and while Lyons is still a centre for the higher artistic silks, it will never be again the chief centre for the silk trade which it was thirty years ago. 

Like examples could be produced by the score. Greenock no longer supplies Russia with sugar, because Russia has plenty of her own at the same price as it sells at in England. The watch trade is no more a speciality of Switzerland: watches are now made everywhere. India extracts from her ninety collieries two-thirds of her annual consumption of coal. The chemical trade which grew up on the banks of the Clyde and Tyne owing to the special advantages offered for the import of Spanish pyrites and the agglomeration of such a variety of industries along the two estuaries is now in decay. Spain, with the help of English capital, is beginning to utilise her own pyrites for herself; and Germany has become a great centre for the manufacture of sulphuric acid and soda---nay, she already complains about over-production. 

But enough ! I have before me so many figures, all telling the same tale, that examples could be multiplied at will. It is time to conclude, and, for every unprejudiced mind, the conclusion is self-evident. Industries of all kinds decentralise and are scattered | all over the globe; and everywhere a variety, an inteI \. grated variety, of trades grows, instead of specialisation. Such are the prominent features of the times we live in. Each nation becomes in its turn a manufacturing nation; and the time is not far off when each nation of Europe, as well as the United States, and even the most backward nations of Asia and America, will themselves manufacture nearly everything they are in need of. Wars and several accidental causes may check for some time the scattering of in

38 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

dustries: they will not stop it; it is unavoidable. For each new-comer the first steps only are difficult. But, as soon as any industry has taken firm root, it calls into existence hundreds of other trades; and as soon as the first steps have been made, and the first obstacles have been overcome, the industrial growth goes on at an accelerated rate. 

The fact is so well felt, if not understood, that the race for colonies has become the distinctive feature of the last twenty years. Each nation will have her own colonies. But colonies will not help. There is not a second India in the world, and the old conditions will be repeated no more. Nay, some of the British colonies already threaten to become serious competitors with their mother country; others, like Australia, will not fail to follow the same lines. As to the yet neutral markets, China will never be a serious customer to Europe: she can produce much cheaper at home; and when she begins to feel a need for goods of European patterns she will produce them herself. Woe to Europe if the day that the steam engine invades China she is still relying on foreign customers ! As to the African half-savages, their misery is no foundation for the wellbeing of a civilised nation. 

Progress is in another direction. It is in producing for home use. The customers for the Lancashire cottons and the Sheffield cutlery, the Lyons silks and the Hungarian flour-mills, are not in India nor in Africa. They are amidst the home producers. No use to send floating shops to New Guinea with German or British millinery when there are plenty of would-be customers for British millinery in these very islands, and for German goods in Germany. And, instead of worrying our brains by schemes for getting customers abroad, it would be better to try to answer the following questions .Why the British worker, whose industrial capacities are so highly praised in political speeches; 

THE DECENTRALISATION OF INDUSTRIES. 39 

why the Scotch crofter and the Irish peasant, whose obstinate labours in creating new productive soil out of peat bogs are occasionally so much spoken of, are no customers to the Lancashire weavers, the Sheffield cutlers and the Northumbrian and Welsh pitmen? Why the Lyons weavers not only do not wear silks, but sometimes have no food in their attics? Why the Russian peasants sell their corn, and for four, six, and sometimes eight months every year are compelled to mix bark and auroch grass to a handful of flour for baking their bread? Why famines are so common amidst the growers of wheat and rice in India? 

Under the present conditions of division into capitalists and labourers, into property-holders and masses living on uncertain wages, the spreading of industries over new fields is accompanied by the very same horrible facts of pitiless oppression, massacre of children, pauperism, and insecurity of life. The Russian Fabrics Inspector's Reports, the Reports of the Plauen Handelskammer, and the Italian inquests are full of the same revelations as the Reports of the Parliamentary Commissions of 1840 to 1842, or the modern revelations with regard to the " sweating system " at Whitechapel and Glasgow, and London pauperism. The Capital and Labour problem is thus universalised; but, at the same time, it is also simplified. To return to a state of affairs where corn is grown, and manufactured goods are fabricated, for the use of those very people who grow and produce them---such will be, no doubt, the problem to be solved during the next coming years of European II history. Each region will become its own producer j" and its own consumer of manufactured goods. But that unavoidably implies that, at the same time, it will be its own producer and consumer of agricultural produce; and that is precisely what I am going to discuss next. 
