# The Possibilities of Agriculture


CHAPTER III. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 

The development of agriculture---Over-population prejudice---Can the soil of Great Britain feed its inhabitants?---British agriculture---Compared with agriculture in France; in Belgium---Market gardening: its achievements---Is it profitable to grow wheat in Great Britain?---American agriculture: intensive culture in the States. 

The industrial and commercial history of the world during the last thirty years has been a history of decentralisation of industry. It was not a mere shifting of the centre of gravity of commerce, such as Europe has witnessed in the past, when the commercial hegemony migrated from Italy to Spain, to Holland, and finally to Britain: it had a much deeper meaning, as it excluded the very possibility of commercial or industrial hegemony. It has shown the growth of quite new conditions, and new conditions require new adaptations. To endeavour to revive the past would be useless: a new departure must be taken by civilised nations. 

Of course, there will be plenty of voices to argue that the former supremacy of the pioneers must be maintained at any price: all pioneers are in the habit of saying so. It will be suggested that the pioneers must attain such a superiority of technical knowledge and organisation as to enable them to beat all their younger competitors; that force must be resorted to if necessary. But force is reciprocal; and if the god of war always sides with the strongest battalions, those battalions are strongest which fight for new rights 

(40) 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 41 

against outgrown privileges. As to the honest longing for more technical education---surely let us all have as much of it as possible: it will be a boon for humanity; for humanity, of course---not for a smgle nation, because knowledge cannot be cultivated for home use only. Knowledge and invention, boldness of thought and enterprise, conquests of genius and improvements of social organisation have become international growths; and no kind of progress---intellectual, industrial or social---can be kept within political boundaries; it crosses the seas, it pierces the mountains; steppes are no obstacle to it. Knowledge and inventive powers are now so thoroughly international that if a simple newspaper paragraph announces to-morrow that the problem of storing force, of printing without inking, or of aerial navigation, has received a practical solution in one country of the world, we may feel sure that withm a few weeks the same problem will be solved, almost in the same way, by several inventors of different nationalities. Continually we learn that the same scientific discovery, or technical invention, has been made within a few days' distance, in countries a thousand miles apart; as if there were a kind of atmosphere which favours the germination of a given idea at a given moment. And such an atmosphere exists: steam, print and the common stock of knowledge have created it. 

Those who dream of monopolising technical genius are therefore fifty years behind the times. The world---the wide, wide world---is now the true domain of knowledge; and if each nation displays some special capacities in some special branch, the various capacities of different nations compensate one another, and the advantages which could be derived from them would be only temporary. The fine British workmanship in mechanical arts, the American boldness for gigantic enterprise, the French systematic mind, and the German pedagogy, are becoming mternational capacities. 

42 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

Sir William Armstrong in his Italian and Japanese workshops communicates to Italians and Japanese those capacities for managing huge iron masses which have been nurtured on the Tyne; the uproarious American spirit of enterprise pervades the Old World; the French taste for harmony becomes European taste; and German pedagogy^---improved, I dare say---is at home in Russia. So, instead of trying to keep life in the old channels, it would be better to see what the new conditions are, what duties they impose on our generation. 

The characters of the new conditions are plain, and their consequences are easy to understand. As the manufacturing nations of West Europe are meeting with steadily growing difficulties in selling their manufactured goods abroad, and getting food in exchange,, they will be compelled to grow their food at home; they will be bound to rely on home customers for their manufactures, and on home producers for their food. And the sooner they do so the better. 

Two great objections stand, however, in the way against the general acceptance of such conclusions. We have been taught, both by economists and politicians, that the territories of the West European States are so overcrowded with inhabitants that they cannot grow all the food and raw produce which are necessary for the maintenance of their steadily increasing populations. Therefore the necessity of exporting manufactured goods and of importing food. And we are told, moreover, that even if it were possible to grow in Western Europe all the food necessary for its inhabitants, there would be no advantage in doing so as long as the same food can be got cheaper from abroad. Such are the present teachings and the ideas which are current in society at large. And yet it is easy to prove that both are totally erroneous: plenty of food could be grown on the territories of Western Europe for much more than their present populations, and an immense benefit would be 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 45 

derived from doing so. These are the two points which I have now to discuss. 

To begin by taking the most disadvantageous case: is it possible that the soil of Great Britain, which at present yields food for one-third only of its inhabitants, could provide all the necessary amount and variety of food for 33,000,000 human beings when it covers only 56,000,000 acres all told---forests and rocks, marshes and peat-bogs, cities, railways and fields-^out of which only 33,000,000 acres are considered as cultivable? * The current opinion is, that it by no means can; and that opinion is so inveterate that we even see men of science, who are generally cautious when dealing with current opinions, endorse that opinion without even taking the trouble of verifying it. It is accepted as an axiom. And yet, as soon as we try to find out any argument in its favour, we discover that it has not the slightest foundation, either in facts or in judgment upon well-known facts. 

Let us take, for instance, J. B. Lawes' estimates of crops which are published every year in The Times. In his estimate of the year 1887 he made the remark that during the eight harvest years 1853-1860 "nearly three-fourths of the aggregate amount of wheat consumed in the United Kingdom was of home growth, and little more than one-fourth was derived from foreign sources "; but five and twenty years later the figures were almost reversed, that is, " during the eight years 1 8791 8 86, little more than one-third has been provided by home crops and nearly two-thirds by imports ". But neither the increase of population by 8,000,000 nor the increase of consumption of wheat by six-tenths 

* Twenty-three per cent, of the total area of England, 40 per cent, in Wales, and 75 per cent, in Scotland are now under wood, coppice, mountain, heath, water, etc. The remainder, i.e., 32,777,513 acres, which are either under culture or under permanent pasture, may be taken as the " cultivable " area of Great Britain. 

44 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

of a bushel per head could account for the change. In the years 1853-60 the soil of Britain nourished one inhabitant on every two acres cultivated: why did it require three acres in order to nourish the same inhabitant in 1887? The answer is plain: merely and simply because agriculture had fallen into neglect. 

In fact, the area under wheat had been reduced since 1853-60 by full 1,590,000 acres, and therefore the average crop of the years 1883-86 was below the average crop of 1853-60 by more than 40,000,000 bushels; and this deficit alone represented the food of more than 7,000,000 inhabitants. At the same time the area under barley, oats, beans, and other spring crops had also been reduced by a further 560,000 acres, which, at the low average of thirty bushels per acre, would have represented the cereals necessary to complete the above for the same 7,000,000 inhabitants. And it could be said that if the United Kingdom imported cereals for 17,000,000 inhabitants in 1887, instead of for 10,000,000 in i860, it was simply because more than 2,000,000 acres had gone out of cultivation.* These facts are well known; but usually they are met with the remark that the character of agriculture had been altered .that instead of growing wheat, meat and milk were produced in this country. However, the figures for 1887, compared with the figures for i860, show that the same downward movement also took place under the heads of green crops and the like. The area under potatoes was reduced by 280,000 acres; under turnips by 180,000 acres; and although there was an 

* Average area under wheat in 1853-60, 4,092,160 acres; average ■crop, 14,310,779 quarters. Average area under wheat in 1S84-87, 2,509,055 acres; average crop (good years), 9,198,956 quarters. See Professor W. Fream's Rothamstcad Experiments (London, i888), page 83. I take in the above Sir John Lawes' figure of 5-65 bushels per head of population every year. It is very close to the yearly allowance of 5-67 bushels of the French statisticians. The Russian statisticians reckon 5-67 bushels of winter crops (chiefly rye) and 2*5 bushels of spring crops (sarrazin, barley, etc.). 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 45 

increase under the heads of mangold, carrots, etc., still the aggregate area under all these crops was reduced by a further 330,000 acres. An increase of area was found only for permanent pasture (2,800,000 acres) and grass under rotation (1,600,000 acres); but we should look in vain for a corresponding increase of live stock. The increase of live stock which took place during those twenty-seven years was not sufficient to cover even the area reclaimed from waste land.* 

Since the year 1887 affairs went, however, from worse to worse. If we take Great Britain alone, we see that in 1885 the area under all corn crops was 8,392,006 acres; that is very small, indeed, in comparison to the area which could have been cultivated; but even that little was further reduced to 7,400,227 acres in 1895. The area under wheat was 2,478,318 acres in 1885 (as against 3,630,300 in 1874); but it dwindled away to 1,417,641 acres in 1895, while the area under the other cereals increased by a trifle only---from 5,198,026 acres to 5,462,184---the total loss on all cereals being nearly 1,000,000 acres in ten years! Another 5,000,000 people were thus compelled to get their food from abroad. 

Did the area under green crops increase during that decade? Not in the least ! It was further reduced by nearly 300,000 acres (3,521,602 in 1885, and 3,225,762 in 1895). Or, was the area under clover and grasses in rotation increased in proportion to all these reductions } Alas, no ! It remained almost stationary (4,654,173 acres in 1885, and 4,729,801 in 1895). In short, taking all the land that is under crops 

* There was an increase of 1,800,000 head of horned cattle, and a decrease of 4J million sheep (6| millions, if we compare the year 1886 with 1868), which would correspond to an increase of ij million of units of cattle, because eight sheep are reckoned as equivalent to one head of horned cattle. But five million acres having been reclaimed upon waste land since i860; the above increase should hardly do for covering that area, so that the 2J million acres which were cultivated no longer remained fully uncovered. They were a pure loss to the nation. 

46 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

in rotation (17,201,490 acres in 1885 and 16,166,950 acres in 1895), we see that within the last ten years another 1,000,000 acres went out of cultivation, without any compensation whatever. It went to increase that already enormous area of more than 16,000,000 acres---one-half of the cultivable area---which goes under the head of " permanent pasture," that is, hardly suffices to feed one cow on each three acres ! 

Need I say, after that, that quite to the contrary of what we are told about the British agriculturists becoming " meat-makers " instead of " wheat-growers " no increase of live stock took place during the last ten years. Where, indeed, could they find their food } Far from devoting the land freed from cereals to • " meat-making," the country further reduced its live stock. It had 6,597,964 head of horned cattle in 1885, and 6,354,336 only in 1895; 26,534,600 sheep in 1885 and 25,792,200 sheep in 1895. True, the number of horses was increased; every butcher and greengrocer runs now a horse " to take orders at the gents' doors " (in Sweden and Switzerland, by the way, they do it by telephone); and consequently Great Britain has 1,545,228 horses instead of the 1,408,788 she had in 1885. But the horses are imported, as also the oats and a considerable amount of the hay that is required for feeding them. And if the consumption of meat has really increased in this country, it is due to cheap imported meat, not to the meat that would be produced in these islands.* In short, agriculture has not changed its direction, as we are often told; it simply went down in all directions. Land is going out of culture at a perilous rate, while the latest improvements in market-gardening, fruit-growing and poultry-keeping are but a mere trifle if we compare them with what has 

* No less than 5,877,000 cwts. of beef and mutton, 1,065,470 sheep and lambs, and 415,565 pieces of cattle were imported in 1895. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 47 

been done in the same direction in France, Belgium and America. 

The cause of this general downward movement is self-evident. It is the desertion, the abandonment of the land. Each crop requiring human labour has had its area reduced; and one-third of the agricultural labourers have been sent away since 1861 to reinforce the ranks of the unemployed in the cities,* so that far from being over-populated, the fields of Britain are starved of human labour as James Caird used to say. The British nation does not work on her soil; she is prevented from doing so; and the would-be economists complain that the soil will not nourish its inhabitants! 

I once took a knapsack and went on foot out of London, through Sussex. I had read Ldonce de Lavergne's work and expected to find a soil busily cultivated; but neither round London nor still less farther south did I see men in the fields. In the Weald I could walk for twenty miles without crossing anything but heath or woodlands, rented as pheasant-shooting grounds to " London gentlemen," as the labourers said. " Ungrateful soil " was my first thought; but then I would occasionally come to a farm at the crossing of two roads and see the same soil bearing a rich crop; and my next thought was tel seigneur, telle terre, as the French peasants say. Later on I saw the rich fields of the midland counties; but even there I was struck by not perceiving the same busy human labour which I was accustomed to admire on the Belgian and French fields. But I ceased to wonder when I learnt that only 1,383,000 men and women in England and Wales work in the fields, while more than 16,000,000 belong to the " professional, domestic, indefinite, and unproductive class," as these pitiless statisticians say. One million 

•Agricultural labourers in England and Wales: 2,100,000 in 1861 1,383,000 in 1884; 1,311,720 in 1891. 

48 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

and three hundred thousand human beings cannot productively cultivate an area of 33,000,000 acres unless they can resort to the Bonanza farm's methods of culture. 

Again, taking Harrow as the centre of my excursions, I could walk hve miles towards London, or turning my back upon it, and I could see nothing east or west but meadow land on which they hardly cropped two tons of hay per acre---scarcely enough to keep alive one milch cow on each two acres. Man is conspicuous by his absence from those meadows; he rolls them with a heavy roller in the spring; he spreads some manure every two or three years; then he disappears until the time has come to make hay. And that---within ten miles from Charing Cross, close to a city with 5,000,000 inhabitants, supplied with Flemish and Jersey potatoes, French salads and Canadian apples. In the hands of the Paris gardeners, each thousand acres situated within the same distance from the city would be cultivated by at least 2000 human beings, who would get vegetables to the value of from ^^^50 to ^^300 per acre. But here the acres which only need human hands to become an inexhaustible source of golden crops lie idle, and they say to us, " Heavy clay ! " without even knowing that in the hands of man there are no unfertile soils; that the most fertile soils are not in the prairies of America, nor in the Russian steppes; that they are in the peat-bogs of Ireland, on the sand downs of the northern sea-coast of France, on the craggy mountains of the Rhine, where they have been made by man's hands. 

The most striking fact is, however, that in some undoubtedly fertile parts of the country things are even in a worse condition. My heart simply ached when I saw the state in which land is kept in South Devon, and when I learned to know what " permanent pasture " means. Field after field is covered with nothing but 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 49 

grass, three inches high, and thistles in profusion. Twenty, thirty such fields can be seen at one glance from the top of every hill; and thousands of acres are in that state, notwithstanding that the grandfathers of the present generation have devoted a formidable amount of labour to the clearing of that land from the stones, to fencing it, roughly draining it and the like. In every direction I could see abandoned cottages and orchards going to ruin. A whole population has disappeared, and even its last vestiges must disappear if things continue to go on as they have gone. And this takes place in a part of the country endowed with a most fertile soil and possessed of a climate which is certainly more congenial than the climate of Jersey in spring and early summer---a land upon which even the poorest cottagers occasionally raise potatoes as early as the first half of May. But how can that land be cultivated when there is nobody to cultivate it? " We have fields; men go by, but never go in," an old labourer said to me; and so it is in reality.* 

It will be said, of course, that the above opinion strangely contrasts with the well-known superiority of British agriculture. Do we not know, indeed, that British crops average twenty-eight bushels of wheat per acre, while in France they reach only seventeen bushels? Does it not stand in all almanacs that Britain gets every year;^ 1 80,000,000 sterling worth of animal produce---milk, cheese, meat and wool---from her fields? All that is true, and there is no doubt that in many respects British agriculture is superior to that of many other nations. As regards obtaining the greatest amount of pro

* Round the small hamlet where I stayed for two summers, there were: one farm, 370 acres, four labourers and two boys; another, about 300 acres, two men and two boys; a third, 800 acres, five men only and probably as many boys. In truth, the problem of cultivating the land with the least number of men has been solved in this spot by not cultivating at all as much as two-thirds of it. 

4 

50 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

duce with the least amount of labour, Britain undoubtedly took the lead until she was superseded by America. Again, as regards the fine breeds of cattle, the splendid state of the meadows and the results obtained in separate farms, there is much to be learned from Britain. But ;a closer acquaintance with British agriculture as a whole discloses many features of inferiority. However splendid, a meadow remains a meadow, much inferior in productivity to a cornfield; and the fine breeds of cattle appear to be poor creatures as long as each ox requires three acres of land to be fed upon. Certainly one may indulge in some admiration at the average twenty-eight bushels grown in this country; but when we learn that only 1,417,000 acres, out of the cultivable 33,000,000, bear such crops, we are quite disappointed. Any one could obtain like results if he were to put all his manure into one-twentieth part of the area which he possesses. Again, the twenty-eight bushels no longer appear to us so satisfactory when we learn that without any manuring, merely by means of a good culture, they have obtained at Rothamstead an average of fourteen bushels per acre from the same plot of land for forty consecutive years; * while with manuring they obtam thirty-eight bushels instead of twenty-eight, and under the allotment system the crops reach forty bushels. In some farms they occasionally attain even fifty and fifty-seven bushels per acre. 

If we intend to have a correct appreciation of British agriculture, we must not base it upon what is obtained on a few selected and well-manured plots; we must inquire what is done with the territory, taken as a whole. t Now, out of each 1000 acres of the aggregate 

* The Rothamstead Experiments, 1888, by Professor W. Fream, p. 35 seq. 

f The figures which I take for these calculations are given in the Statesman's Year-book, 1896, and the Agricttltitral Returns of the Board of Agriculture for 1895. 

They are as follows:---

Acres. Total area (Great Britain) 56,457.5oo 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 5 1 

\ "^l 

Fig. I.---Proportion of the cultivated area which is given to cereals altogether, and to wheat, in Great Britain and Ireland, 

52 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

territoty of England, Wales and Scotland, 418 acres are left under wood, coppice, heath, buildings and so on. We need not find fault with that division, because it depends ver}' much upon natural causes. In France and Belgium one-third of the territor}is in hke manner also treated as uncultivable, although portions of it are continually reclaimed and brought under culture. But, leaving aside the " uncultivable " portion, let us see what is done with the 582 acres out of looo of the " cultivable" part (32,777,000 acres in Great Britain). First of all, it is divided into two almost equal parts, and one of them---295 acres out of 1000---is left under "permanent pasture," that is, in most cases it is entirely uncultivated. Very little hay is obtained from it,* and some cattle are grazed upon it. More than one-half of the cultivable area is thus left without cultivation, and the remainder, i.e., 287 acres only out of each 1000 acres, is imder culture. Out of these last, 1 10 acres are under corn crops, twenty-one acres under potatoes, fifty

Uncultivable area:---Acres. 

England ....... 7,481,000 

Wales 1,885,000 

Scotland ....... 14,314,000 

Great Britain 23,680,000 

Cultivable area:---

Great Britain .......,, 32,777,500 

Out of it, under:---

Permanent pasture ....... 16,610,563 

Clover and mature grasses ...... 4,729,801 

Corn crops and potatoes (541,217 acres) .... 7,400,227 

Green crops ......... 3,225,762 

Bare fallow, etc. ........ 475,650 

Hops 58,940 

Small fruit ......... 74o47 

Flax .......... 2,023 

Under culture (including permanent pasture giving hay) . 16,166,950 

Out of the 6,879,825 acres given to corn crops, 1,417,641 acres were under wheat; 2,166,279 under barley, and 3,225,905 under oats. 

* Only from each eighty-five acres, out of these 295, hay is obtained. The remainder are grazing grounds. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 53 

seven acres under green crops and eighty-four acres under clover fields and grasses under rotation. And finally, out of the no acres given to corn crops, the best twenty-five acres (one-fortieth part of the territory, one-twenty-third of the cultivable area) are picked out and sown with wheat They are well cultivated, well manured, and upon them an avereige of twenty-eight bushels to the acre is obtained; and upon these twentyfive acres out of 1000 the world superiority of British agriculture is based. 

The net result of all that is, that on nearly 33,000,000 acres of cultivable land the food is grown for one-third part only of the population (two-thirds of the food it consumes is imported), and we may say accordingly that, although nearly two-thirds of the territory is cultivable, British agriculture provides home-grown food for each 125 or 130 inhabitants only per square mile (out of 378). In other words, nearly three acres of the cultivable area are required to grow the food for each person. Let us then see what is done with the land in France and Belgium. 

Now, if we simply compare the average twenty-eight bushels per acre of wheat in Great Britain with the average seventeen bushels in France, the comparison is all in favour of these islands; but such averages are of little value because the two systems of agriculture are totally different in the two countries. The Frenchman also has his picked and heavily manured " twentyfive acres " in the north of France and in Ile-de-France, and from these picked acres he obtains average crops ranging from thirty-one to thirty-three bushels.* How

* That is, thirty-one to thirty-three bushels on the average; forty bushels in good farms, and fifty in the best. The area under wheat is 17,500,000 acres: the cultivated area, 95,000,000 acres; and the aggregate superficies of France, 132,000,000 acres. Compare Lecouteux, he lie, sa culture extensive et intensive, 18S3; Risler, Physiologie et culture dii ble, 1886; Boitet, Herbages et prairies natiirelles, 18S5; Baudrillart, Les populations agricoles de la Normandie, 1880; Grandeau, La production agricole en France; Leonce de Lavergne's last edition; and so on. 

54 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

ever, he sows with wheat, not only the best picked out acres, but also such fields on the Central Plateau and in Southern France as hardly yield ten, eight and even six bushels to the acre, without irrigation; and these low crops reduce the average for the whole country. The Frenchman cultivates much that is left here under permanent pasture---and this is what is described as his " inferiority " in agriculture. In fact, although the proportion between what we have named the " cultivable area " and the total territory is very much the same in France as it is in Great Britain (624 acres out of each 1000 acres of the territory), the area under wheat crops is nearly six times as great, in proportion, as what it is in Great Britain (146 acres instead of twenty-five, out of each 1000 acres); the corn crops altogether cover more than two-fifths of the cultivable area, and large areas are given besides to green crops, industrial crops, vine, fruit and vegetables. 

Taking ever}thing into consideration, although the Frenchman keeps less cattle, and especially grazes less sheep than the Briton, he nevertheless obtains from his soil nearly all the food that he and his cattle consume. He imports, m an average year, but one-tenth only of what the nation consumes, and he exports to this country considerable quantities of food produce (iT 1 0,000,000 worth), not only from the south, but also, and especially, from the shores of the Channel (Brittany butter and vegetables; fruit and vegetables from the suburbs of Paris, and so on).* 

The net result is that, although one-third part of the territory is also treated as " uncultivable," the soil of 

* The exports from France in 1S94 (average year) attained: wine 233,000,000 fr., spirits 54,000,000 fr., cheese, butter and sugar 114,000,000 fr. To this country France sent, same year, £2,744,870 worth of wine, £2,227,360 worth of refined sugar, £2,351,870 worth of butter, £982,800 worth of eggs (£1,611,500 in 1S93), and £1,402,300 worth of brandy, all of French origin only, in addition to £14,403,040 worth of manufactured silks and woollens. The exports from Algeria are not taken in the above figures. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 55 

France yields the food for 170 inhabitants per square mile (out of 188), that is, for forty persons more, per square mile, than this country.* 

It is thus apparent that the comparison with France is not so much in favour of this country as it is said to be; and it will be still less favourable when we come, in our next chapter, to horticulture. As to the comparison with Belgium, it is even more striking---the more so as the two systems of culture are similar in both countries. To begin with, in Belgium we also find an average crop of twenty-seven and eight-tenths bushels of wheat to the acre; but the area given to wheat is five times as big as Great Britain, in comparison to the cultivable area, and the cereals cover almost one half of the land available for culture.! The land is so well cultivated that the average crops for the years 1889

* Each 1000 acres of French territory are disposed of as follows: 376 acres are left under wood, coppice, communal grazing grounds, etc., and 624 acres are treated as "cultivable". Out of each "cultivable" 624 acres, 128 are under meadows (now irrigated to a great extent), ninetytwo under bare fallow and various cultures, 272 under cereals, eightythree under green and industrial crops, forty-seven under vineyards. No less than 146 acres are under wheat, which yields twenty-eight to thirty bushels in two departments, twenty-six bushels in twelve departments. 

On the whole, more than seventeen bushels per acre is the average in one half of the country, and less than seventeen bushels in the other half. 

As to cattle, we find in Great Britain 6,353,336 cattle (i.e., nineteen head per each 100 acres of the cultivable area), including in that number over 1,250,000 calves under one year, and 25,792,195 sheep {i.e., seventy-nine sheep per 100 acres of the same). In France we find 12,879.240 cattle (sixteen head per each 100 acres of cultivable area) and only 20,721,850 sheep (twenty-five sheep per 100 acres of the same). Im other words, the proportion of horned cattle is nearly the same in both countries (nineteen head and sixteen head per 100 acres), a considerable difference appearing in favour of this country only as to the number of sheep (seventy-nine as against twenty-five). The heavy imports of hay, oil-cake, oats, etc., into this country must, however, not be forgotten, because, for each head of cattle which lives on imported food, eight sheep can be grazed, or be fed with home-grown fodder. As to horses, both countries stand on nearly the same footing. 

t Out of each 1000 acres of the territory, 673 are cultivable, and 327 are left as uncultivable. Of the former, 317 acres are given to cereals, 1S2 to green crops and grasses under rotation; 121 acres are given to wheat and wheat mixed with rye (ninety-four to pure wheat). Moreover, upon each sixty-three acres, out of 1000, catch crops of carrots, mangold and swedes are obtained. 

56 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

92 (the very bad year of 1891 being left out of account) were twenty-eight and six-tenths bushels per acre for winter wheat; nearly forty-seven bushels for oats (thirty-five to forty-one and a half in Great Britain), and forty bushels for winter barley (twenty-nine to thirty-five in Great Britain); while on no less than 459,800 acres catch crops of swedes (2,226,250 tons) and carrots (155,000 tons) were obtained. All taken, they grow in Belgium more than 76,000,000 bushels of cereals, i.e., fifteen and seven-tenths bushels per acre of the cultivable area, while the corresponding figure for Great Britain is only eight and a half bushels; and they keep almost twice as much cattle upon each cultivable acre as is kept in Great Britain.* Large portions of the land are given besides to the culture of industrial plants, potatoes for spirit, beet for sugar, and so on. 

However, it must not be believed that the soil of Belgium is more fertile than the soil of this country. On the contrary, to use the words of Laveleye, " only one half, or less, of the territory offers natural conditions which are favourable for agriculture "; the other half consists of a gravelly soil, or sands, " the natural sterility of which could be overpowered only by heavy manuring ". Man, not nature, has given to the Belgian soil its present productivity. With this soil and labour, Belgium succeeds in supplying nearly all the food of a population which is denser than that of England and Wales, and numbers 544 inhabitants to the square mile. If the exports and imports of agricultural produce from and into Belgium be taken into account, we can say that 

* Taking all horses, cattle and sheep in both countries, and reckoning eight sheep as equivalent to one head of horned cattle, we find that Belgium has twciity-thrcc cattle units and horses upon each loo acres of territory, as against tieenty same units and horses in Great Britain. If we. take cattle alone, the disproportion is much greater, as we find thirtysix cattle units on each loo acres of cultivable area, as against nineteen in Great Britain. The annual value of animal produce in Belgium is estimated by the Annuaiie Statistiqiie de la Belgiqnc (1893, p. 263) at ^58,039,050, including poultry (£1,534.000). 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 

57 

Xaveleye's conclusions are still good, and that only •one inhabitant out of each ten to twenty requires im

FiG, 2.---Proportion ot the cultivated area which is given to cereals altogether, and to wheat, in Belgium. The square which encloses the wheat square represents the area given to both wheat and a mixture of wheat with rye. 

ported food. The soil of Belgium supplies with homegrown food no less than 490 inhabitants per sqjiare mile, 

58 

FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

and there remains something for export---no less thair ;^ 1, 000,000 worth of agricultural produce being exported 

-5S^ 

Fig. 3.---Proportion of cultivated and uncultivated areas in Great Britain, Belgium and France, a, Wheat; b, wheat and rye mixed; c, other cereals; d, green crops and permanent pasture; e, uncultivated. 

every year to Great Britain. Besides, it must not be forgotten that Belgium is a manufacturing country 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 59 

which exports home-made goods to the value of £g per head of population (;;6^ 56,000,000, on the average, in 1886-92), while the total exports from the United Kingdom attain only £6 /s. per inhabitant. As to separate parts of the Belgian territory, the small and naturally unfertile province of West Flanders not only grows the food of its 580 inhabitants on the square mile, but exports agricultural produce to the value of 25 s. per head of its population. And yet no one can read Laveleye's masterly work without coming to the conclusion that Flemish agriculture would have realised still better results were it not hampered m its growth by the steady and heavy increase of rent. In the face of the rent being increased each nine years, many farmers have lately abstained from further improvements. 

Without going as far as China, I might quote similar examples from elsewhere, especially from Lombardy. But the above will be enough to caution the reader against hasty conclusions as to the impossibility of feeding 39,000,000 people from 78,000,000 acres. They also will enable me to draw the following conclusions: (i) If the soil of the United Kingdom were cultivated only as it was thirty-five years ago, 24,000,000 people, instead of 1 7,000,000, could live on home-grown food; and that culture, while giving occupation to an additional 750,000 men, would give nearly 3,000,000 wealthy home customers to the British manufactures. (2) If the cultivable area of the United Kingdom were cultivated as the soil is cultivated on the average in Belgium, the United Kingdom would have food for at least 37,000,000 inhabitants; and it might export agricultural produce without ceasing to manufacture so as freely to supply all the needs of a wealthy population. And finally (3), if the population of this country came to be doubled, all that would be required for producing the food for 80,000,000 inhabitants would be to cultivate the soil as it is cultivated in the best farms of this country. 

6o FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

in Lombardy, and in Flanders, and to utilise some meadows, which at present lie almost unproductive, in the same way as the neighbourhoods of the big cities in France are utilised for market-gardening. All these are not fancy dreams, but mere realities; nothing but modest conclusions from what we see round about us, without any allusion to the agriculture of the future. 

If we want, however, to know what agriculture can be, and what can be grown on a given amount of soil, we must apply for information to such regions as the district of Saffelare in East Flanders, the island of Jersey, or the irrigated meadows of Lombardy, which are mentioned in the next chapter. Or else we may apply to the market-gardeners in this country, or in the neighbourhoods of Paris or in Holland, to the " truck farms " in America, and so on. 

While science devotes its chief attention to industrial pursuits, a lirnited number of lovers of nature and a legion of workers whose very names will remain unknown to posterity have created of late a quite new agriculture, as superior to modern farming as modern farming is superior to the old three-fields system of our ancestors. Science seldom guided them, and sometimes misguided---as was the case with Liebig's theories, developed to the extreme by his followers, who induced us to treat plants as glass recipients of chemical drugs, and who forgot that the only science capable of dealing with life and growth is physiology, not chemistry. Science seldom has guided them: they proceeded in the empirical way; but, like the cattle-growers who opened new horizons to biology, they have opened a new field of experimental research for the physiology of plants. They have created a totally new agriculture. They smile when we boast about the rotation system, having permitted us to take from the field one crop every year, or four crops each three years, because their ambition 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 6 1 

is to have six and nine crops from the very same plot of land during the twelve months. They do not understand our talk about good and bad soils, because they make the soil themselves, and make it in such quantities as to be compelled yearly to sell some of it: otherwise it would raise up the level of their gardens by half an inch every year. They aim at cropping, not five or six tons of grass on the acre, as we do, but from fifty to lOO tons of various vegetables on the same space; not £s worth of hay but;^ioo worth of vegetables, of the plainest description, cabbage and carrots. That is where agriculture is going now. 

We know that the dearest of all varieties of our staple food is meat; and those who are not vegetarians, either by persuasion or by necessity, consume on the average 225 lb. of meat---that is, roughly speaking, a little less than the third part of an ox---every year. And we have seen that, even in this country and Belgium, two to three acres are wanted for keeping one head of horned cattle; so that a community of, say, 1,000,000 inhabitants would have to reserve somewhere about 3,000,000 acres of land for supplying it with meat. But if we go to the farm of M. Goppart---one of the promoters of ensilage in France---we shall see him growing, on a drained and well-manured field, no less than an average of 120,000 lb. of corn-grass in the acre, which gives 30,000 lb. of dry hay---that is, the food of one horned beast per acre. The produce is thus trebled. As to beetroot, which is used also for feeding cattle, Mr. Champion, at Whitby, succeeds, with the help of sewage, in growing 100,000 lb. of beet on each acre, and occasionally 150,000 and 200,000 lb. He thus grows on each acre the food of, at least, two or three head of cattle. And such crops are not isolated facts: thus, M. Gros, at Autun, succeeds in cropping 600,000 lb. of beet and carrots, which crop would permit him to keep four horned cattle on each acre. As to crops of 100,000 

62 

FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

lb. of beet, they occur in numbers in the French competitions, and the success depends entirely upon good culture and appropriate manuring. It thus appears that while under ordinaryhigh farming we need from 2,000,000 acres to keep 1,000,000 horned cattle, double that amount could be kept on one-half of that area; and if the density of population required it, the amount of cattle could be doubled again, and the area required to keep it might still be one-half, or even one-third of what it is now.* 

The above examples are striking enough, and yet those afforded by the market-gardening culture are still more striking. I mean the culture carried on in the neighbourhood of big cities, and more especially the culture tnaraichere round Paris. In that culture each plant is treated according to its age. The seeds germinate and the seedlings develop their first four leaflets in especially favourable conditions of soil and temperature; then the best seedlings are picked out and transplanted into a bed of fine loam, under a frame or in the open air, where they freely develop their rootlets and, gathered on a limited space, receive more than usual care; and only after that preliminary training are they bedded in the open ground, where the)grow till ripe. 

* Assuming that 9000 lb. of dry hay are necessary for keeping one head of horned cattle every year, the following figures (taken from Toubeau's Repartition inityique dts iinpots) will show what we obtain now under usual and under intensive culture:---

' CroD ner acre Equivalent in Number of Englb. ^ryhay. cattle fed from ^ Eng. lb. each too acres. 

Pasture 

Unirrigated meadows Clover, cut twice Swedish turnips . Rye-grass . Beet, high farming Indian corn, ensilage 

— 1,200 

— 2,400 1---4,800 

38,500 10,000 

64,000 18,000 

1 64,000 21,000 

1 120,000 30,000 

13 26 

52 108 180 210 330 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 63 

In such a culture the primitive condition of the soil is of little account, because loam is made out of the old forcing beds. The seeds are carefully tried, the seedlings receive proper attention, and there is no fear of drought, because of the variety of crops, the liberal watering with the help of a steam engine, and the stock of plants always kept ready to replace the weakest individuals. Almost each plant is treated individually. 

There prevails, however, with regard to marketgardening, a misunderstanding which it would be well to remove. It is generally supposed that what chiefly attracts market-gardening to the great centres of population is the market. It must have been so; and so it may be still, but to some extent only. A great number of the Paris maraichers, even of those who have their gardens within the walls of the city and whose main crop consists of vegetables in season, export the whole of their produce to England. What chiefly attracts the gardener to the great cities is stable manure; and this is not wanted so much for increasing the richness of the soil---one-tenth part of the manure used by the French gardeners would do for that purpose---but for keeping the soil at a certain temperature. Early vegetables pay best, and in order to obtain early produce not only the air but the soil as well must be warmed; and that is done by putting great quantities of properly mixed manure into the soil; its fermentation heats it. But it is evident that with the present development of industrial skill, the heating of the soil could be obtained more economically and more easily by hot-water pipes. Consequently, the French gardeners begin more and more to make use of portable pipes, or tkermo siphons, provisionally established in the cool frames. This new improvement becomes of general use, and we have the authority of Barral's Dictioitnaire d' Agriculture to affirm that it gives excellent results. 

As to the different degrees of fertility of the soil---

64 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

always the stumbling-block of those who write about agriculture---the fact is that in market-gardening the soil is always made, whatever it originally may have been. Consequently---we are told by Prof. Dybowski, in the article " MaraTchers " in Barral's Dictionytaire d' Agriculture---it is now a usual stipulation of the renting contracts of the Paris viaraichers that the gardener may carry away his soil, down to a certain depth, whea he quits his tenancy. He himself makes it, and when he moves to another plot he carts his soil away, together with his frames, his water-pipes, and his other belongings.* 

I could not relate here all the marvels achieved in market-gardening; so that I must refer the reader ta works---most interesting works---especially devoted to the subject, and give only a few illustrations.! Let us take, for instance, the orchard---the niarais---of M.. Ponce, the author of a well-known work on the culture maraichere. His orchard covered only two and seventenths acres. The outlay for the establishment, including a steam engine for watering purposes, reached ^^^1136. Eight persons, ]\I. Ponce included, cultivated the orchard 

* " Portable soil " is not the latest departure in agriculture. The last, one is the watering of the soil with special liquids containing special microbes. It is a fact that chemical manures, without organic manure, seldom prove to be sufficient. On the other hand, it was discovered lately that certain microbes in the soil are a necessary condition for the growth of plants. Hence the idea of sowing the beneficent microbes, which rapidly develop in the soil and fertilise it. We certainly shall soon hear more of this new method, which is experimented upon on a large scale in Germany, in order to transform peat-bogs and heavy soils into rich meadows and fields. See "Recent Science" in Nineteenth Century ^ October, 1897. 

t Ponce, La culture maraichere, 1869; Gressent, Le potager moderne, 7th edit., 1886; Courtois-Gerard, Manuel pratique de culture maraichere, 1863; Vilmorin, Lc bon jardinier (almanac). The general reader who cares to know about the productivity of the soil will find plenty of examples, well classified, in the most interesting work La Repartition mctrique des impots, by A. Toubeau, 2 vols., 1880. I do not quote many excellent English manuals, but I must remark that the market-gardening culture in this country has also obtained results very highly prized by the Continental gardeners, and that the chief reproach to be addressed to it is its relatively small extension. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 6$ 

and carried the vegetables to the market, for which purpose one horse was kept; when returning from Pans they brought in manure, for which £iOO was spent every year. Another;^iOO was spent in rent and taxes. But how to enumerate all that was gathered every year on this plot of less than three acres, without filling two pages or more with the most wonderful figures? One must read them in M. Ponce's work, but here are the chief items: more than 20,000 lb. of carrots; more than 20,000 lb. of onions, radishes and other vegetables sold by weight; 6000 heads of cabbage; 3000 of cauliflower; 5000 baskets of tomatoes; 5000 dozen of choice fruit; and 1 54,000 heads of salad; in short, a total of 250,000 lb. "of vegetables. The soil was made to such an amount out of forcing beds that every year 250 cubic yards of loam had to be sold. Similar examples could be given by the dozen, and the best evidence against any possible exaggeration of the results is the very high rent paid by the gardeners, which reaches in the suburbs of London from £10 to ^^^15 per acre, and in the suburbs of Paris attains as much as £^2 per acre. No less than 2125 acres are cultivated round Paris in that way by 5000 persons, and thus not only the 2,000,000 Parisians are supplied with vegetables, but the surplus is also sent to London. 

The above results are obtained with the help of warm frames, thousands of glass bells, and so on. But even without such costly things, with only thirty-six yards of frames for seedlings, vegetables are grown in the open air to the value of i^200 per acre.* It is obvious, however, that in such cases the high selling prices of the crops are not due to the high prices fetched by early vegetables in winter; they are entirely due to the high crops of the plainest ones. Let me add also that all this wonderful culture is a yesterday's growth. Fifty 

* Manuel pratique de culture maraichire, by Courtois-Gerard, 4th edit., 1863. 

5 

66 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

years ago the culture maraichere was quite primitive. But now the Paris gardener not only defies the soil---he would grow the same crops on an asphalt pavement---he defies climate. His walls, which are built to reflect light and to protect the wall-trees from the northern ■winds, his wall-tree shades and glass protectors, his frames and pepinieres have made a real garden, a rich Southern garden, out of the suburbs of Paris. He has given to Paris the " two degrees less of latitude " after which a French scientific writer was longing; he supplies his city with mountains of grapes and fruit at any season; and in the early spring he inundates and perfumes it with flowers. But he does not only grow articles of luxury. The culture of plain vegetables on a large scale is spreading every year; and the results are so good that there are now practical inaraichers who venture to maintain that if all the food, animal and vegetable, necessary for 3,500,000 inhabitants of the departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise had to be grown on their own territory (3250 square miles), it could be grown without resorting to any other methods of culture than those already in use---methods already tested on a large scale and proved to be successful. 

And yet the Paris gardener is not our ideal of an agriculturist. In the painful work of civilisation he has shown us the way to follow; but the ideal of modern civilisation is elsewhere. He toils, with but a short interruption, from three in the morning till late in the night. He knows no leisure; he has no time to live the life of a human being; the commonwealth does not exist for him; his world is his garden, more than his family. He cannot be our ideal; neither he nor his system of agriculture. Our ambition is, that he should produce even more than he does with less labour, and should enjoy all the joys of human life. And this is fully possible. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 6/ 

As a matter of fact, if we put aside those gardeners who chiefly cultivate the so-called primeurs---strawberries ripened in January, and the like---if we take only those who grow their crops in the open field, and resort to frames exclusively for the earlier days of the life of the plant, and if we analyse their system, we see that its very essence is, first, to create for the plant a nutritive and porous soil, which contains both the necessary decaying organic matter and the inorganic compounds; and then to keep that soil and the surrounding atmosphere at a temperature and moisture superior to those of the open air. The whole system is summed up in these few words. If the French maraicher spends prodigies of labour, intelHgence, and imagination in combining different kinds of manure, so as to make them ferment at a given speed, he does so for no purpose but the above: a nourishing soil, and a desired equal temperature and moisture of the air and the soil. All his empirical art is devoted to the achievement of these two aims. But both can also be achieved in another and much easier way. The soil can be improved by hand, but it need not be made by hand. Any soil, of any desired composition, can be made by machinery. We already have manufactures of manure, engines for pulverising the phosphorites, and even the granites of the Vosges; and we shall see manufactures of loam as soon as there is a demand for them. 

It is obvious that at present, when fraud and adulteration are exercised on such an immense scale in the manufacture of artificial manure, and the manufacture of manure is considered as a chemical process, while it ought to be considered as a physiological one, the gardener prefers to spend an unimaginable amount of labour rather than risk his crop by the use of a pompously labelled and unworthy drug. But that is a social obstacle which depends upon a want of knowledge and a bad social organisation, not upon physical 

68 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

causes.* As to the necessity of creating for the earHer life of the plant a warm soil and atmosphere, forty years ago L^once de Lavergne foretold that the next step in culture would be to warm the soil. Heating pipes give the same results as the fermenting manures, but at a much smaller expense of human labour. And already the system works on a large scale, as will be seen from the next chapter. Through it the productive powers of a given area of land are increased more than a hundred times. 

Of course now, when the capitalist system makes us pay for everything four or five times its labour value, we often spend about;^i for each square yard of a heated conservatory. But how many middlemen are making fortunes on the wooden sashes imported from Drontheim .'' If we only could reckon our expenses in labour, we should discover to our amazement that, thanks to the use of machinery, the square yard of a conservatory does not cost more than half a day of human labour; and we will see presently that the Jersey and Guernsey average for cultivating one acre under glass is only three men working ten hours a day. Therefore the conservatory, which formerly was a luxury, is rapidly entering into the domain of high culture. And we may foresee the day when the glass conservatory will be considered as a necessary appendix to the field, both for the growth of those fruits and vegetables which cannot succeed in the open air, and for the preliminary 

* Already it is partly removed in France and Belgium, owing to the public laboratories where analyses of seeds and manure ar6\ made free. The falsifications discovered by these laboratories exceed all that could have been imagined. Manures, containing only one-fifth part of the nutritious elements they were supposed to contain, were found to be quite common; while manures containing injurious matters, and no nutritious parts whatever, were not unfrequently supplied by firms of " respectable " repute. With seeds, things stand even worse. Samples of grass seeds which contained 20 per cent, of injurious grasses, or 20 per cent, of grains of sand, so coloured as to deceive the buyer, or even 10 per cent, of a deadly poisonous grass, passed through the Ghent laboratory'. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 69 

training of most cultural plants during the earlier stages of their life. 

Home-grown fruit is always preferable to the halfripe produce which is imported from abroad, and the additional work required for keeping a young plant under glass is largely repaid by the incomparable superiority of the crops. As to the question of labour, when we remember the really incredible amount of labour which has been spent on the Rhine and in Switzerland for making the vineyards, their terraces, and stone walls, and for carrying the soil up the stony crags, as also the amount of labour which is spent every year for the culture of those vineyards and fruit gardens, we are inclined to ask, which of the two, all taken, requires less of human labour---a vinery (I mean the cold vinery) in a London suburb, or a vineyard on the Rhine, or on Lake Leman? And when we compare the prices realised by the grower of grapes round London (not those which are paid in the West-end fruit shops, but those received by the grower for his grapes in September and October) with those current in Switzerland or on the Rhine during the same months, we are inclined to maintain that nowhere in Europe, beyond the forty-fifth degree of latitude, are grapes grown at less expense of human labour, both for capital outlay and yearly work, than in the vineries of the London and Brussels suburbs. As to the always overrated productivity of the exporting countries, let us remember that the vine-growers of Southern Europe drink themselves an abominable piqiielte; that Marseilles fabricates wine for home use out of dry raisins brought from Asia; and that the Normandy peasant who sends his apples' to London, drinks real cider only on great festivities. Such a state of things will not last for ever; and the day is not far when we shall be compelled to look to our own resources to provide many of the things which we now import. And we shall not be the worse 

70 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

for that. The resources of science, both in enlarging the circle of our production and in new discoveries, are inexhaustible. And each new branch of activity calls into existence more and more new branches, which steadily increase the power of man over the forces of nature. If we take all into consideration; if we realise the progress made of late in the gardening culture, and the tendency towards spreading its methods to the open field; if we watch the cultural experiments which are being made now---experiments to-day and realities tomorrow---and ponder over the resources kept in store by science, we are bound to say that it is utterly impossible to foresee at tlie present moment the limits as to the maximum number of human beings who could draw their means of subsistence from a given area of land, or as to what a variety of produce they could advantageously grow in any latitude. Each day widens former limits, and opens new and wide horizons. All we can say now is, that 600 persons could easily live on a square mile; and that, with cultural methods already used on a large scale, 1000 human beings---not idlers---living on looo acres could easily, without any kind of overwork, obtain from that area a luxurious vegetable and animal food, as well as the flax, wool, silk, and hides necessary for their clothing. As to what may be obtained under still more perfect methods---also known but not yet tested on a large scale---it is better to abstain from any forecast: so unexpected are the w recent achievements of intensive culture. '^ 

We thus see that the over-population fallacy does not stand the very first attempt at submitting it to a closer examination. Those only can be horror-stricken at seeing the population of this country increase by one individual every lOOO seconds who think of a human being as a mere claimant upon the stock of material wealth of mankind, without being at the same time a contributor to that stock. But we, who see in each new

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 7 1 

born babe a future worker capable of producing much more than his own share of the common stock---we greet his appearance. We know that a crowded population is a necessary condition for permitting man to increase the productive powers of his labour. We know that highly productive labour is impossible so long as men are scattered, few in numbers, over wide territories, and are thus unable to combme together for the higher achievements of civilisation. We know what an amount of labour must be spent to scratch the soil with a primitive plough, to spin and weave by hand; and we know also how much less labour it costs to grow the same amount of food and weave the same cloth with the help of modern machinery. We also see that it is infinitely easier to grow 200,000 lb. of food on one acre than to grow them on ten acres. It is all very well to imagine that wheat grows by itself on the Russian steppes; but those who have seen how the peasant toils in the " fertile " black-earth region will have one desire: that the increase of population may permit the use of the steam-digger and gardening culture in the steppes; that it may permit those who are now the beasts of burden of humanity to raise their backs and to become at last men. 

We must, however, recognise that there are a few economists fully aware of the above truths. They gladly admit that Western Europe could grow much more food than it does; but they see no necessity nor advantage in doing so, as long as there are nations which can supply food in exchange for manufactured goods. Let us then examine how far this view is correct. 

It IS obvious that if we are satisfied with merely stating that it is cheaper to bring wheat from Riga than to grow it in Lincolnshire, the whole question is settled in a moment. But is it so in reahty? Is it really cheaper to have food from abroad } And, supposing it 

72 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

is, are we not yet bound to analyse that compound result which we call price, rather than to accept it as a supreme and blind ruler of our actions ^ 

We know, for instance, how French agriculture is burdened by taxation. And yet, if we compare the prices of articles of food in France, which herself grows most of them, with the prices in this country, which imports them, we find no difference in favour of the importing country. On the contrary, the balance is rather in favour of France, and it decidedly was so for wheat until the new protective tariff was introduced. As soon as one goes out of Paris (where the prices are swollen by a heavy octroi), one finds that every /lome produce is cheaper in France than it is in England, and that the prices decrease further when we go farther East on the Continent. 

There is, however, another feature still more unfavourable for this country: namely, the enormous development of the class of middlemen who stand between the importer and the home producer on the one side and the consumer on the other. We have lately heard a good deal about the quite disproportionate part of the prices we pay which goes into the middleman's pockets. We have all heard of the East-end clergyman who was compelled to become butcher in order to save his parishioners from the greedy middleman. We read in the papers that many farmers of the midland counties do not realise more than gd. for a pound of butter, while the customer pays from is. 6d. to is. 8d.; and that from I ^^2 d. to 2d. for the quart of milk is all that the Cheshire farmers can get, while we pay 4d. for the adulterated, and 5d. for the unadulterated milk. An analysis of the Covent Garden prices and a comparison of the same with retail prices, which was made some years ago in the Daily News, proved that the customer pays for vegetables at the rate of 6d. to is., and sometimes more, for each penny realised b}' the grower. But in a 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 73 

-country of imported food it must be so: the grower who himself sells his own produce disappears from its markets, and in his place appears the middleman* If we move, however, towards the East, and go to Belgium, Germany, and Russia, we find that the cost of living is more and more reduced, so that finally we find that in Russia, which remains still agricultural, wheat •costs one-half or two-thirds of its London prices, and meat is sold throughout the provinces at from five to ten farthings (kopecks) the pound. And we may therefore hold that it is not yet proved at all that it is cheaper to live on imported food than to grow it ourselves. 

But if we analyse price, and make a distinction between its different elements, the disadvantage becomes still more apparent. If we compare, for instance, the •costs of growing wheat in this country and in Russia, we are told that in the United Kingdom the hundredweight of wheat cannot be grown at less than 8s. /d.; while in Russia the costs of production of the same hundredweight are estimated at from 3s. 6d. to 4s. gd.t The difference is enormous, and it would still remain very great even if we admit that there is some exaggeration in the former figure. But why this difference? Are the Russian labourers paid so much less for their 

* A few winters ago, a friend of mine, who lived in a London suburb, used to get his butter from Bavaria per parcel post. It cost him los. the eleven pounds in Bavaria, parcel post inclusive (2s. 2d.), 6d. the money order, and 2jd. the letter; total, less than iis. Butter of an inferior quality (out of comparison), with 10 to 15 per cent, of water inclusive, was sold in London at is. 6d. the lb. at the same time. 

t The data for the calculation of the cost of production of wheat in this country are those given by the Mark Lane Express; they will be found in a digestible form in an article on wheat-growing in the Quarterly Review for April, 1887, and in W. E. Bear's book, The British Farmer and his Competitors, London (Cassell), 1888. Although they are a little above the average, the crop taken for the calculations is also above the average. A similar inquiry has been made on a large scale by the Russian Provincial Assemblies, and the whole is summed up in an elaborate paper, in the Vyestnik Promyshleiuiosti, No. 49, 1887. To compare the paper kopecks with pence I took the rouble at YVij of 'ts nominal value: such was its average quotation during the year 1886. I took 475 English lb. in the quarter of wheat. 

74 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

work? Their mone\' wages surely are much lower, but the difference is equalised as soon as we reckon their wages in produce. The twelve shillings a week of the British agricultural labourer represents the same amountof wheat in Britain as the six shillings a week of the Russian labourer represents in Russia,* not to say a word about the cheapness of meat in Russia and the low house rent. The Russian labourer is thus paid the same amount of the produce grown as he is paid here. As to the supposed prodigious fertility of the soil in the Russian prairies, it is a fallacy. Crops of from sixteen to twenty-three bushels per acre are considered good crops in Russia, while the average hardly reaches thirteen bushels, even in the corn-exporting parts of the empire. Besides, the amount of labour which is necessary to grow wheat m Russia with no thrashingmachines, with a plough dragged by a horse hardly worth the name, with no roads for transport, and so on, is certainly much greater than the amount of labour which is necessary to grow the same amount of wheat in Western Europe. 

When brought to the London market, Russian wheat was sold in 1887 at 31s. the quarter, while it appeared from the same Mark Lane Express figures that the quarter of wheat could not be grown in this country at less than 36s. 8d., even if the straw be sold, which is not always the case. But the difference of the land rent in both countries would alone account for the difference of prices. In the wheat belt of Russia, where the 

* It results from the detailed figures given by the Agricultural Department {The Year ISSo with regard to Agriculture, vol. ii.), that the average wages of the agricultural labourers were from 180 kopecks a week in middle Russia to 330 kopecks in the wheat-exporting belt (from 3s. gd. to 6s. 6d.), and from 5s. 6d. to los. 5d. during the harvest. Since 1885 the wages went up in both countries; the average wages of the English labourer were given for i8g6 at 13s. yd. If the Russian labourer is so miserable in comparison with the English, it is due chiefly to the exceedingly high personal taxation and several other causes which cannot be here treated incidentally. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 75 

average rent stands at about 12s. per acre, and the crop is from fifteen to twenty bushels, the rent amounts to from 3 s. 6d. to 5 s. 8d. in the costs of production of each quarter of Russian wheat; while in this country, where the rent and taxes are valued (in the Mark Lane Express figures) at no less than 40s. per each wheatgrowing acre, and the crop is taken at thirty bushels, the rent amounts to los. in the costs of production of each quarter."* But even if we take only 30s. per acre of rent and taxes, and an average crop of twenty-eight bushels, we still have 8s. 8d. out of the sale price of each quarter of wheat, which goes to the landlord and the State. If it costs so much more in money to grow wheat m this country while the amount of labour is so much less in this country than in Russia, it is due to the very great height of the land rents attained during the years i8601880. But this growth itself was due to the facilities for realising large profits on the sale of manufactured goods abroad. The false condition of British rural economy, not the infertility of the soil, is thus the chief cause of the Russian competition. 

Much more ought to be said with regard to the American competition, and therefore I must refer the reader to the remarkable series of articles dealing with the whole of the subject which Schaeffle published in 1886 in the Zeitschrift fiir die gesamnite Staatswissenschaft, and to a most elaborate article on the costs of growing wheat all over the world which appeared in April, 1887, in the Quarterly Review. The conclusions of these two writers are fully corroborated by the yearly reports of the American Board of Agriculture, and Schaeffle's previsions were fully supported by the subse

* The rents have declined since 1887, but the prices of wheat also went down. It must not be forgotten that as the best acres only are selected for wheat-growing, the rent for each acre upon which wheat is grown must be taken higher than the average rent per acre in a farm of from 200 to 300 acres. 

76 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

quent reports of Mr. J. R. Dodge. It appears from these works that the fertility of the American soil had been grossly exaggerated, as the masses of wheat which America sends to Europe from its north-western farms are grown on a soil the natural fertility of which is not higher, and often lower, than the average fertility of the unmanured European soil. The Casselton farm in Dakota, with its twenty bushels per acre, is an exception; while the average crop of the chief wheat-growing States in the West is only from eleven to twelve bushels. If we wish to find a fertile soil in America, and crops of from thirty to forty bushels, we must go to the old Eastern States, where the soil is made by man's hands.* But we shall not find it in the Territories, which are satisfied with crops of from eight to nine bushels. The same is true with regard to the American supplies of meat. Schaeffle has pointed out that the great mass of live stock which we see in the census of cattle in the States is not reared in the prairies, but in the stables of the farms, in the same way as in Europe; as to the prairies, we find on them only one-eleventh part of the American horned cattle, one-fifth of the sheep and onetwenty-first of the pigs.t " Natural fertility " being thus out of question, we must look for social causes; and we have them, for the Western States, in the cheapness of land and a proper organisation of production; and for the Eastern States in the rapid progress of intensive high farming. 

It is evident that the methods of culture must vary according to different conditions. In the vast prairies 

* L. de Lavergne pointed out as far back as forty years ago that the States are the chief importers of guano. In 1S54 they imported it almost to the same amount as this country, and they had, moreover, sixty-two manufactories of guano which supplied it to the amount of sixteen times the imports. Compare also Ronna's L' agriculture aitx Etats Unis, 1881; Lecouteux, Le ble; and J. R. Dodge's Annual Report of the American Department of Agriculture for 1885 and 1886. Schaeffle's work is also summed up in Schmoller's yahrbuch. 

t See also J. R. Dodge's Farm and Factory, New York, 1SS4. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. "^y 

of North America, where land could be bought from 8s. to 40s. the acre, and where spaces of from 100 to 150 square miles in one block could be given to wheat culture, special methods of culture were applied and the results were excellent. Land was bought---not rented. In the autumn, whole studs of horses were brought, and the tilling and sowing were done with the aid of formidable ploughs and sowing machines. Then the horses were sent to graze in the mountains; the men were dismissed, and one man, occasionally two or three, remained to winter on the farm. In the spring the owners' agents began to beat the inns for hundreds of miles round, and engaged labourers and tramps, both freely supplied by Europe, for the crop. Battalions of men were marched to the wheat fields, and were camped there; the horses were brought from the mountains, and in a week or two the crop was cut, thrashed, winnowed, put in sacks, by specially invented machines, and sent to the next elevator, or directly to the ships which carried it to Europe. Whereupon the men were disbanded agam, the horses were sent back to the grazing grounds, or sold, and again only a couple of men remained on the farm. 

The crop from each acre was small, but the machinery was so perfected that in this way 300 days of one man's labour produced from 200 to 300 quarters of wheat; in other words---the area of land being of no account---every man produced in one day his yearly bread food (eight and a half bushels of wheat); and taking into account all subsequent labour, it was calculated that the work of 300 men in one single day delivered to the consumer at Chicago the flour that is required for the yearly food of 250 persons. Twelve hours and a half of work are thus required in Chicago to supply one man with his yearly provision of wheat-flour. 

Under the special conditions offered in the Far West this certainly was an appropriate method for increasiri/' 

78 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

all of a sudden the wheat supplies of mankind. It answered its purpose when large territories of unoccupied land were opened to enterprise. But it could not answer for ever. Under such a system of culture the soil was soon exhausted, the crop declined, and intensive agriculture (which aims at high crops on a limited area) had soon to be resorted to. Such was the case in Iowa in the year 1878. Up till then, Iowa was an emporium for wheat-growing on the lines just indicated. But the soil was already exhausted, and when a disease came the wheat plants had no force to resist it. In a few weeks nearly all the wheat crop, which was expected to beat all previous records, was lost; eight to ten bushels per acre of bad wheat were all that could be cropped. The result was that " mammoth farms " had to be broken up into small farms, and that the Iowa farmers (after a terrible crisis of short duration---ever^'thing is rapid in America) took to a more intensive culture. Now, they are not behind France in wheat culture, as they already grow an average of sixteen and a half bushels per acre on an area of more than 2,000,000 acres, and they will soon win ground. Somehow, with the aid of manure and improved methods of farming they compete admirably with the mammoth farms of the Far West. 

In fact, over and over again it was pointed out, by Schaeffle, Semler, Oetken, and many other writers, that the force of " American competition " is not in its mammoth farms, but in the countless small farms upon which wheat is grown in the same way as it is grown in Europe, i.e., with manuring, but with a better organised production and facilities for sale, and without being compelled to pay to the landlord a toll of one-third part, or more, of the selling price of each quarter of wheat. However, it was only after I had myself made a tour in the prairies of Manitoba that I could realise the full truth of the just-mentioned views. The 15,000,000 to 20,000,000 bushels of wheat, which are exported every 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 79 

year from Manitoba, are grown almost entirely in farms of one or two " quarter-sections," i.e., of 160 and 320 acres. The ploughing is made in the usual way, and in an immense majority of cases the farmers buy the reaping and binding machines (the " binders ") by associating in groups of four. The thrashing machine is rented by the farmer for one or two days, and the farmer carts his wheat to the elevator with his own horses, either to sell it immediately or to keep it at the elevator if he is in no immediate need of money and hopes to get a higher price in one month or two. In short, in Manitoba one is especially struck with the fact that, even under a system of keen competition, the middle-size farm admirably well competes with the mammoth farm, and that it is not manufacturing wheat on a grand scale which pays best. It is also most interesting to note that thousands and thousands of farmers produce mountains of wheat in the Canadian province of Toronto and in the Eastern States, although the land is not prairieland at all, and the farms are, as a rule, small. 

The force of " American competition " is thus not in the possibility of having hundreds of acres of wheat in one block. It lies in the ownership of the land, in a system of culture which is appropriate to the • character of the country, in a widely developed spirit of association, and, finally, in a number of institutions and customs intended to lift the agriculturist and his profession to a high level which is unknown in Europe. 

In Europe we do not realise at all what is done in the States and Canada in the interests of agriculture. In every American State, and in every distinct region of Canada, there is an experimental farm, and all the work of preliminary experiment upon new varieties of wheat, oats, barley, fodder and fruit, which the farmer has mostly to make himself in Europe, is made under the best scientific conditions at the experimental farms, on a small scale first and on a large scale next. The 

8o FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

results of all these researches and experiments are not merely rendered accessible to the farmer who would like to know them, but they are brought to his knowledge, and, so to speak, are forced upon his attention by every possible means. The " Bulletins " of the ex-^ perimental stations are distributed in hundreds of thousands of copies; visits to the farms are organised in such a way that thousands of farmers should inspect the stations every year, and be shown by specialists the results obtained, either with new varieties of plants or under various new methods of treatment. Correspondence is carried on with the farmers on such a scale that,, for instance, at Ottawa, the experimental farm sends out every year a hundred thousand letters and packets. Every farmer can get, free of charge and postage, three pounds of seed of any variety of cereals, out of which he can get next year the necessary seed for sowing several acres. And, finally, in every small and remote township there are held farmers' meetings, at which special lecturers, who are sent out by the experimental farms or the local agricultural societies, discuss with the farmers in an informal way the results of last year's experiments and discoveries relative to every branch of agriculture, horticulture, cattle-breeding, dairying and agricultural co-operation.* 

American agriculture really offers an imposing sight.. Not in the wheat fields of the far West, which soon will become a thing of the past, but in the development of rational agriculture and the forces which promote it. Read the description of an agricultural exhibition, " the State's fair," in some small town of Iowa, with its 70,000 farmers camping with their families m tents during the fair's week, studying, learning, buying and selling, and enjoying life. You see a national fete, and 

* Some additional information on this subject will be found in the articles of mine: "Some Resources of Canada," and "Recent Science,"' in The Nineteenth Century, January, 1898, and October, 1897. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 8 1 

you feel that you deal with a nation in which agriculture is in respect. Or read the publications of the scores of experimental stations, whose reports are distributed broadcast over the country, and are read by the farmers and discussed at countless " farmers' meetings ". Consult the " Transactions " and " Bulletins " of the countless agricultural societies, not royal but popular; study the grand enterprises for irrigation; and you will feel that American agriculture is a real force, imbued with life, which no longer fears mammoth farms, and needs not to cry like a child for protection. 

" Intensive " agriculture and gardening are already by this time as much a feature of the treatment of the soil in America as they are in Belgium. As far back as. the year 1880, nine States, among which were Georgia,, Virginia and the two Carolinas, bought;i^5, 7 50,000 worth of artificial manures; and we are told that by this time the use of artificial manure has immensely spread towards the West. In Iowa, where mammoth farms used to exist twenty years ago, sown grass is already in use, and it is highly recommended by both the Iowa Agricultural Institute and the numerous local agricultural papers; while at the agricultural competitions the highest awards are given, not for extensive farming, but for high crops on small areas. Thus, at a recent competition in which hundreds of farmers took part, the first ten prizes were awarded to ten farmers who h?d grown, on three acres each, from 262 to 346^ bushels of Indian corn, in other words from 8y to ii§ bushels to the acre. This shows where the ambition of the Iowa farmer goes. In Minnesota the prizes were given two years ago for crops of 300 to 11 20 bushels of potatoes to the acre, i.e., from eight and a quarter to thirtyone tons to the acre, while the average potato crop in^ Great Britain is only six tons. 

At the same time market-gardening is immenselyextending in America. In the market-gardens of Florida'. 

6 

82 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

we see such crops as 445 to 600 bushels of onions per acre, 400 bushels of tomatoes, 700 bushels of sweet potatoes, which testify to a high development of culture. As to the " truck farms " (market-gardening for export by steamer and rail), they covered, in 1892, 400,000 acres, and the fruit farms in the suburbs of Norfolk, in Virginia, were described by Prof. Ch. Baltet * as real models of that sort of culture---a very high testimony in the mouth of a French gardener who himself comes from the model marais of Troyes. 

And while people in London continue to pay almost all the year round twopence for a lettuce (very often imported from Paris), they have at Chicago and Boston those unique establishments in the world where lettuces are grown in immense greenhouses with the aid of electric light; and we must not forget that although the discovery of " electric " growth is European (it is due to Siemens), it was at the Cornell University that it was proved by a series of experiments that electric light is an admirable aid for forwarding the growth of the green parts of the plant. 

In short, America, which formerly took the lead in bringing " extensive " agriculture to perfection, now takes the lead in " intensive," or forced, agriculture as well. In this adaptability lies the real force of American competition. 

* UHorttcnlture dans les cinq Parties dti Monde. Paris, 1895. 
