# The Possibilites of Agriculture (*continued*)


CHAPTER V. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE— (con<«HM*<f). 

Extension of market gardening and fruit growing: in France; in the United States---Culture under glass---Kitchen gardens under glass---Hothouse culture: in Guernsey; in Belgium---Conclusion. 

One of the most interesting features of the present evolution of agriculture is the extension lately taken by intensive market gardening of the same sort as has been described in the third chapter. What formerly was limited to a few hundreds of small gardens, is now spreading with an astonishing rapidity. In this country the area given to market gardens has more than doubled within the last sixteen years, and attained, in 1894, 88,210 acres, as against 40,582 acres in 1879.* But it is especially in France, Belgium and America that this branch of culture has lately taken a great development. (See Appendix M.) 

At the present time no less than 1,075,000 acres are given in France to market-gardening and intensive fruit culture, and a few years ago it was estimated that the average yield of every acre given to these cultures attains ^^33 los.t Their character, as well as the amount of skill displayed in, and labour given to, these cultures, will best appear from the following illustrations. 

* Charles Whitehead, Hints on Vegetable and Fruit Farming, London (J. Murray), 1S90. The Gardener's Chronicle, 20th April, 1895. 

t Charles Baltet, L' Horticulture dans les cinq Parties du Monde. Ouvrage courottne par la Societe Nationalc d^ Horticulture. Paris (Hachette), 1S95. 

(104) 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 105 

About Roscoff, which is a great centre m Brittany •for the export to England of such potatoes as will keep till late in summer, and of all sorts of vegetables, a territory, twenty-six miles in diameter, is entirely given to these cultures, and the rents attain and exceed £^ per acre. Nearly 300 steamers call at Roscoff to ship potatoes, onions and other vegetables to London and different English ports, as far north as Newcastle. Moreover, as much as 4000 tons of vegetables are sent every year to Paris.* And although the Roscoff peninsula enjoys a specially warm climate, small stone walls are erected everywhere, and rushes are grown on their tops in order to give still more protection and heat to the vegetables.! The climate is improved as well as the soil. 

In the neighbourhoods of Cherbourg it is upon land conquered from the sea that the best vegetables are grown---more than 800 acres of that land being given to potatoes exported to London; another 500 acres are given to cauliflower; 125 acres to Brussels sprouts; and so on. Potatoes grown under glass are also sent to the London market from the middle of April, and the total export of vegetables from Cherbourg to England attains 300,000 cwts., while from the small port of Barfleur another 100,000 cwts. are sent to this country, and about 60,000 cwts. to Paris. Nay, in a quite small commune, Surtainville, near Cherbourg, ^^2800 are made out of 180 acres of market gardens, three crops being taken every year: cabbage in February, early potatoes next, and various crops in the autumn---to say nothing of the catch crops. At Ploustagel one hardly believes that he is in Brittany. Melons used to be grown at that spot, long since, in the open fields, with glass frames to protect them from the spring frosts, and green peas were grown under the protection of rows of furze which 

* Charles Baltet, loc. cit. 

t Ardouin Dumaz^t, Voyage en France, vol. v., p. 10. 

I06 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

sheltered them from the northern winds. Now, whole fields are covered with strawberries, roses, violets, cherries and plums, down to the very sea beach.* Even the landes are reclaimed, and we are told that in five years, or so there will be no more landes in that district (p. 265). Nay, the marshes of the Dol---" The Holland of Brittany "---protected from the sea by a wall (5050 acres), have been turned into market gardens, covered with cauliflowers, onions, radishes, haricot beans and so on, the acre of that land being rented at from £2 lOs. 

to;^4. 

About Paris no less than 50,000 acres are given tc the field culture of vegetables and 25,000 acres to the forced culture of the same. Already fifty years ago the yearly rent paid by market gardeners attained as much as;^i8 and £2^ per acre, and yet it has been increased since, as well as the gross receipts, which were valued by Courtois Gerard at £2Ap per acre for the larger market gardens, and twice as much for the smaller ones in which early vegetables are grown in frames. 

The fruit culture in the neighbourhoods of Paris is equally wonderful. At ^lontreuil, for instance, 7 50 acres, belonging to 400 gardeners, are literally covered with stone walls, specially erected for growing fruit, and having an aggregate length of 400 miles. Upon these walls, peach trees, pear trees and vines are spread, and every year something like 12,000,000 peaches are gathered, as well as a considerable amount of the finest pears and grapes. The acre in such conditions brings in £^^. This is how a " warmer climate " was made, at a time when the greenhouse was still a costly luxury. All taken, 1250 acres are given to peaches (25,000,000 peaches every year) in the close neighbourhood of Paris. Acres and acres are also covered with pear trees which yield three to five tons 

* Ardouin Dumazet, Voyage en France, vol. v., p. 200, 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 10/ 

of fruit per acre, such crop being sold at from ^^50 to £60. Nay, at Angers, on the Loire, where pears are eight days in advance of the suburbs of Paris, Baltet knows an orchard of five acres, covered with pears (low trees), which brings in;£"400 every year; and at a distance of thirty-three miles from Paris one pear plantation brings in £2:\ per acre---the costs of package, transport and selling being deducted. Likewise, the plantations of plums, of which 80,000 cwts. are consumed every year at Paris alone, give an annual money income of from ^^^29 to ^^48 per acre every year; and yet^ pears, plums and cherries are sold at Paris, fresh and juicy, at such a price that the poor, too, can eat fresh home-grown fruit. 

In the province of Anjou one may see how a heavy clay, improved with sand taken from the Loire and with manure, has been turned, in the neighbourhoods of Angers, and especially at Saint Laud, into a soil which is rented at from £2 los. to £^ the acre, and upon that soil fruit is grown which a few years ago was exported to America.' At Bennecour, a quite small village of 850 inhabitants, near Paris, one sees what man can make out of the most unproductive soil. Quite recently the steep slopes of its hills were only mergers from which stone was extracted for the pavements of Paris. Now these slopes are entirely covered with apricot and cherry trees, black-currant shrubs, and plantations of asparagus, green peas and the like. In 1881, ^^5600 worth of apricots alone was sold out of this village, and it must be borne in mind that competition is so acute in the neighbourhoods of Paris that a delay of twenty-four hours in the sending of apricots to the market will often mean a loss of 8s.---one-seventh of the sale price on each hundredweight.! 

* Baudrillart, Les Popnlations agricoles de la France: Anjou, pp. 70-71. 

t The total production of dessert fruit as well as dried or preserved 

fruit in France was estimated, in 1876, at 84,000 tons, and its value was 

I08 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

At Perpignan, green artichokes---a favourite vegetable in France---are grown, from October till June, on an area covering 2500 acres, and the net revenue is estimated at;^32 per acre. In Central France, artichokes are even cultivated in the open fields, and nevertheless the crops are valued (by Baltet) at from ^48 to i^ioo per acre. In the Loiret, 1500 gardeners, who occasionally employ 5000 workmen, obtain from;^400,ooo to ^^480,000 worth of vegetables, and their yearly expenditure for manure is £^60,000. This figure alone is the best answer to those who are fond of talking about the extraordinary fertility of the soil, each time they are told of some success in agriculture. At Lyons, a population of 430,000 inhabitants is entirely supplied with vegetables by the local gardeners. The same is in Amiens, which is another big industrial city. The districts surrounding Orleans form another great centre for market-gardening, and it is especially worthy of notice that the shrubberies of Orleans supply even America with large quantities of young trees.* 

It would take, however, a volume to describe the chief centres of market-gardening and fruit-growing in France; and I will mention only one region more, where vegetables and fruit-growing go hand in hand. It lies on the banks of the RhSne, about Vienne, where we find a narrow strip of land, partly composed of granite rocks, which has now become a garden of an incredible richness. The origin of that wealth, we are told by Ardouin Dumazet, dates from some thirty years ago, when the vineyards, ravaged by phylloxera, had to be destroyed and some new culture had to be found. The village of Ampuis became then renowned for its apricots. At the present time, for a full 100 miles along the 

taken at about 3,000,000,000 fr. (;£■ 120,000,000)---more than one-half of the war contribution levied by Germany. It must have largely increased since 1876. (See Appendix M.) 

* Ardouin Dumazet, i., 204. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. IO9 

Rhone, and in the lateral valleys of the Ardeche and the Drome, the country is an admirable orchard, from which millions' worth of fruit is exported, and the land attains the selling price of from £},2'^ to ^^400 the acre.* Small plots of land are continually reclaimed for culture upon every crag. On both sides of the roads one sees the plantations of apricot and cherry trees, while between the rows of trees early beans and peas, strawberries, and all sorts of early vegetables are grown. In the spring the fine perfume of the apricot trees in bloom floats over the whole valley. Strawberries, cherries, apricots, peaches and grapes follow each other in rapid succession, and at the same time cartloads of French beans, salads, cabbages, leeks, and potatoes are sent towards the industrial cities of the region. It would be impossible to estimate the quantity and value of all that is grown in that region. Suffice it to say that a tiny commune. Saint Ddsirat, exported during Ardouin Dumazet's visit about 2000 cwts. of cherries every day. 

I must refer the reader to the work of Charles Baltet if he will know more about the extension taken by market-gardening in different countries, and will only mention Belgium and America. 

The exports of vegetables from Belgium have increased twofold within the last twenty years, and whole regions, like Flanders, claim to be now the marketgarden of England, even seeds of the vegetables preferred in this country being distributed free by one horticultural society in order to increase the export. Not only the best lands are appropriated for that purpose, but even the sand deserts of the Ardennes and peat-bogs are turned into rich market-gardens, while large plains (namely at Haeren) are irrigated for the same purpose. Scores of schools, experimental farms, and small experimental stations, evening lectures, and 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. vii., p. 125. 

no FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

SO on, are opened by the communes, the private societies, and the State, in order to promote horticulture, and hundreds of acres of land are covered with thousands of greenhouses. Here we see one small commune exporting 5500 tons of potatoes and;£"4000 worth of pears, to Stratford and Scotland, and keeping for that purpose its own line of steamers. Another commune supplies the north of France and the Rhenish provinces with strawberries, and occasionally sends some of them to Co vent Garden as well. Elsewhere early carrots, which are grown amidst flax, barley and white poppies, give a considerable addition to the farmer's income. In another place we learn that land is rented at £24 and £2/ the acre, not for grapes or melon-growing but for the modest culture of onions; or that the gardeners have done away with such a nuisance as natural soil in their frames, and prefer to make their loam out of wood sawings, tannery refuse and hemp dust, " animalised " by various composts.* In short, Belgium, which is one of the chief manufacturing countries of Europe, is now becoming one of the chief centres of horticulture. (See Appendix N.) 

The other country which must especially be recommended to the attention of horticulturists is America. When we see the mountains of fruit imported from America we are inclined to think that fruit in that country grows by itself. " Beautiful climate," " virgin soil," " immeasurable spaces "---these words continually recur in the papers. The reality, however, is that horticulture---i.e., both market-gardening and fruit culture---has been brought in America to a high degree of perfection. Prof. Baltet, a practical gardener himself, originally from the classical marais (market-gardens) of Troyes, describes the " truck farms " of Norfolk in Vir

* Charles Baltet, L' Horticulture, etc. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. I I I 

■ginia as real " model farms ". A highly complimentary appreciation from the lips of a practical niaraicher who has learned from his infancy that only in fairyland do the golden apples grow by the fairies' magic wand. As to the perfection to which apple-growing has been brought in Canada, the aid which the apple-growers receive from the Canadian experimental farms, and the means which are resorted to, on a truly American scale, to spread information amongst the farmers and to supply them with new varieties of fruit trees---all this ought to be carefully studied in this country, instead of inducing Englishmen to believe that the American supremacy is due to the golden fairies' hands. If one-tenth part of what is done in the States and in Canada for favouring agriculture and horticulture were done in this country, English fruit would not have been so shamefully driven out of the market as it is at the present time. 

The extension given to horticulture in America is immense. The " truck farms " alone---i.e., the farms which work for export by rail or steam---covered in the States in 1892 no less than 400,000 acres. At the very doors of Chicago one single market-gardening farm covers 500 acres, and out of these, 150 acres are given to cucumbers, 50 acres to early peas, and so on. During the Chicago Exhibition a special " strawberry express," composed of thirty waggons, brought in every day 324,000 quarts of the freshly gathered fruit, and there are days that over 10,000 bushels of strawberries are imported in New York---three-fourths of that amount coming from the " truck farms " of Virginia by steamer.* 

This is what can be achieved by an intelligent combination of agriculture with industry, and undoubtedly Avill be applied on a still larger scale in the future. 

However, a further advance is being made in order 

* Ch. Baltet, U Horticulture, etc. 

112 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

to emancipate horticulture from climate. I mean theglasshouse culture of fruit and vegetables. 

Formerly the greenhouse was the luxury of the rich mansion. It was kept at a high temperature, and was made use of for growing, under cold skies, the golden fruit and the bewitching flowers of the South. Now, and especially since the progress of technics allows of making cheap glass and of having all the woodwork, sashes and bars of a greenhouse made by machinery, the glasshouse becomes appropriated for growing fruit for the million, as well as for the culture of common vegetables. The aristocratic hothouse, stocked with the rarest fruit trees and flowers, remains; nay, it spreads more and more for growing luxuries which become more and more accessible to the great number. But by its side we have the plebeian greenhouse, which is heated for only a couple of months in winter, and the still more economically built " cool greenhouse," which is a simple glass shelter---a big " cool frame "---and is stuffed with the humble vegetables of the kitchen garden: the potatoes, the carrots, the French beans, the peas and the like. The heat of the sun, passing through the glass, but pre\'ented by the same glass from escaping by radiation, is sufficient to keep it at a very high temperature during spring and early summer. A new system of horticulture---the market-garden under glass---is thus rapidly gaining ground. 

The greenhouse for commercial purposes is essentially of British, or perhaps Scottish, origin. Already in 1 85 1, Mr. Th. Rivers had published a book. The Orchard Houses and the Cultivation of Fruit Trees in Pots under Glass. And we are told by Mr. D. Thomson, in ^Q. Journal oj Horticulture (31st January, 1889), that nearly fifty years ago grapes in February were sold at 25s. the pound by a grower in the north of England, and that part of them was sent by the buyer to Patis, for Napoleon Ill's table, at 50s. the pound. " Now,"' 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. II 3 

Mr. Thomson adds, " they are sold at the tenth or twentieth part of the above prices. Cheap coal---cheap grapes; that is the whole secret." 

Large vineries and immense establishments for growing flowers under glass are of an old standing in this country, and new ones are continually built on a grand scale. Entire fields are covered with glass at Cheshunt, at Broxburn (fifty acres), at Finchley, at Bexley, at Swanley, at Whetstone, and so on, to say nothing of Scotland. Worthing is also a well-known centre for growing grapes and tomatoes; while the greenhouses given to flowers and ferns at Upper Edmonton, at Chelsea, at Orpington, and so on, have a world-wide reputation. And the tendency is, on the one side, to bring grape culture to the highest degree of perfection, and, on the other side, to cover acres and acres with glass for growing tomatoes, French beans and peas, which undoubtedly will soon be followed by the culture of still plainer vegetables. 

At the present time the Channel Islands and Belgium take the lead in the development of glasshouse culture. The glory of Jersey is, of course, Mr. Bashford's establishment. When I visited it in 1890, it contained 490,000 square feet under glass---that is, nearly thirteen acres, but seven more acres under glass have been added to it since. A long row of glasshouses, interspersed with high chimneys, covers the ground---the largest of the houses being 900 feet long and forty-six feet wide; this means that about one acre of land, in one piece, is under glass. The whole is built most substantially: granite walls, great height, thick " twenty-seven oz. glass " (of the thickness of three pennies),* ventilators which open upon a length of 200 and 300 feet by working one single handle; and so on. And yet the most luxurious of these greenhouses was said by the owners 

* " Twenty-one oz." and even " fifteen oz." glass is used in the cheaper greenhouses. 

8 

114 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

to have cost less than is. the square foot of glass (13d. the square foot of ground), while the other houses have cost much less than that. From 5d. to gd. the square foot of glass * is the habitual cost, without the heating apparatus---6d. bemg a current price for the ordinaryglasshouses. 

But it would be hardly possible to give an idea of all that is grown in such glasshouses, without producing photographs of their insides. In 1890, on the 3rd of May, exquisite grapes began to be cut in Mr. Bashford's vineries, and the crop was continued till October. In other houses, cartloads of peas had already been gathered, and tomatoes were going to take their place after a thorough cleaning of the house. The 20,000 tomato plants, which were going to be planted, had to yield no less than eighty tons of excellent fruit (eight to ten pounds per plant). In other houses melons were grown instead of the tomatoes. Thirty tons of early potatoes, six tons of early peas, and two tons of early French beans had already been sent away in April. As to the vineries, they yielded no less than twenty-five tons of grapes every year. Besides, very many other things were grown m the open air, or as catch crops, and all that amount of fruit and vegetables was the result of the labour of thirty-six men and boys only, under the supervision of one single gardener---the owner himself; true that in Jersey, and especially in Guernsey, every one is a gardener. About 1000 tons of coke were burnt to heat these houses. Mr. W. Bear, who has visited the same establishment in 1886, was quite right to say that from these thirteen acres they obtained money returns equivalent to what a farmer would obtain from 1300 acres of land. 

However, it is in the small " vineries " that one sees, perhaps, the most admirable results. As I walked 

* It is reckoned by measuring the height of the front and back walls and the length of the two slopes of the roof. 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. I 15 

through such glass-roofed kitchen gardens, I could not but admire this recent conquest of man. I saw, for instance, three-fourths of an acre heated for the first three months of the year, from which about eight tons of tomatoes and about 200 lb. of French beans had been taken as a first crop in April, to be followed by two crops more. In these houses one gardener was employed with two assistants, a small amount of coke was consumed, and there was a gas engine for watering purposes, consuming only 13 s. worth of gas during the quarter. I saw again, in cool greenhouses---simple plank and glass shelters---pea plants covering the walls, for the length of one quarter of a mile, which already had yielded by the end of April 3200 lb. of exquisite peas and were yet as full of pods as if not one had been taken off. I saw potatoes dug from the soil in a cool greenhouse, in April, to the amount of five bushels to the twenty-one feet square. And when chance brought me, in 1896, in company with a local gardener, to a tiny, retired " vinery " of a veteran grower, I could see there, and admire, what a lover of gardening can obtain from so small a space as the two-thirds of an acre. Two small " houses " about forty feet long and twelve feet wide, and a third---formerly a pigsty, twenty feet by twelve---contained vine trees which many a professional gardener would be happy to have a look at; especially the whilom pigsty, fitted with " Muscats " ! Some grapes (in June) were already in full beauty, and one fully understands that the owner could get in 1895, from a local dealer, £4. for three bunches of grapes (one of them was a " Colmar," 13%^ lb. weight). The tomatoes and strawberries in the open air, as well as the fruit trees, all on tiny spaces, were equal to the grapes; and when one is shown on what a space half a ton of strawberries can be gathered under proper culture, it is hardly believable. 

It is especially in Guernsey that the simplification of the greenhouse must be studied. Every house in 

Il6 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

the suburbs of St. Peter has some sort of greenhouse, big or small. All over the island, especially in the north, wherever you look, you see greenhouses. They rise amid the fields and from behind the trees; they are piled upon one another on the steep crags facing the harbour of St. Peter; and with them a whole generation of practical gardeners has grown up. Every farmer is more or less of a gardener, and he gives free scope to his inventive powers for devismg some cheap type of greenhouses. Some of them have almost no front and back walls---the glass roofs coming low down and the two or three feet of glass in front simply reaching the ground; in some houses the lower sheet of glass was simply plunged into a wooden trough standing on the ground and filled with sand. IMany houses have only two or three planks, laid horizontally, instead of the usual stone wall, in the front of the greenhouse. The large houses of one big company are built close to each other, and have no partitions between. As to the extensive cool greenhouses on the Grande IMaison estate, which are built by a company and are rented to gardeners for so much the lOO feet, they are simply made of thin deal board and glass. They are on the " lean to " or " one roof " system, and the back wall, ten feet high, and the two side walls are in simple grooved boards, standing upright The whole is supported by uprights inserted into concrete pillars. They are said to cost not more than 5d. the square foot, of glass-covered ground. And yet, even such plain and cheap houses yield excellent results. The potato crop which had been grown in some of them was excellent, as also the green peas* In Jersey I even saw a row of five houses, the walls of which were made of corrugated iron, for the sake of cheapness. Of course, the owner himself was not oversanguine about his houses. " They are too cold in 

• Growing peas along the wall seems, however, to be a bad system. It requires too much work in attaching the plants to the wall. 

Il8 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

winter and too hot in summer." But although the five houses cover only less than one-fifth of an acre, 2000 lb. of green peas had already been sold as a first crop; and. in the first days of June, the second crop (about 1500 plants of tomatoes) was already in good progress. 

It is always difficult, of course, to know what are the money returns of the growers, first of all because Thorold Rogers' complaint about modern farmers keeping no accounts holds good, even for the best gardening establishments, and next because when the returns are known to me in all details it would not be right for me to publish them. Roughly speaking, I can confirm Mr. Bear's estimate to the effect that under proper management even a cool greenhouse, which covers 4050 square feet, can give a gross return of i^i8o. " Don't prove too much; beware of the landlord ! " a practical gardener once wrote to me. 

As a rule, the Guernsey and Jersey growers have only three crops every year from their greenhouses. They will start, for instance, potatoes in December. The house will, of course, not be heated, fires being made only when a sharp frost is expected at night; and the potato crop (from eight to ten tons per acre) will be ready in April or May before the open-air potatoes begin to be dug out. Tomatoes will be planted next and be ready by the end of the summer. Various catch crops of peas, radishes, lettuce and other small things will be taken in the meantime. Or else the house will be " started " in November with melons, which will be ready in April. They will be followed by tomatoes, either in pots, or trained as vines, and the last crop of tomatoes will be in October. Beans may follow and be ready for Christmas. I need not say that every grower has his preference method for utilising his houses, and it entirely depends upon his skill and watchfulness to have all sorts of small catch crops. These last begin to have a greater and greater importance, and one can 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. II9 

already foresee that the growers under glass will be forced to accept the methods of the French maraichers, so as to have five and six crops every year, so far as it can be done without spoiling the present high quality of the produce. 

All this industry is of very recent origin. One may see it still working out its methods. And yet the exports from Guernsey alone are already represented by quite extraordinary figures. It was estimated a few years ago that they were as follows: Grapes, 502 tons,;£^37,500 worth at the average price of gd. the pound; tomatoes, looo tons, about ^^30,000; early potatoes (chiefly in the fields), i^20,000; radishes and broccoli,;£^9250; cut flowers, iJ^3000; mushrooms,;!{5"200; total, ^^^99,950— to which total the local consumption in the houses and hotels, which have to feed nearly 30,000 tourists, must be added. But now these figures must have grown considerably. In June, 1896, I saw the Southampton steamers taking every day from 9000 to 12,000, and occasionally more, baskets of fruit (grapes, tomatoes, French beans and peas), each basket representing from twelve to fourteen pounds of fruit. Taking into account what was sent by other channels, we may thus say that from 400 to 500 tons of tomatoes, grapes, beans and peas, worth from;^20,ooo to;^2 5,000, are exported every week in June. 

All this is obtained from an island whose total area, rocks and barren hill-tops included, is only 16,000 acres, of which only 9884 acres are under culture, and 5189 acres are given to green crops and meadows. An island, moreover, on which 1480 horses, 7260 head of cattle and 900 sheep find their existence. How many men's food is, then, grown on these 10,000 acres? 

Belgium has also made, within the last few years, an immense progress in the same direction. While no more than 250 acres, all taken, were covered with glass some twenty years ago, more than 800 acres are under 

120 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

glass by this time.* In the village of Hoeilaert, which is perched upon a stony hill, nearly 200 acres are under glass, given up to grape-growing. One single establishment, Baltet remarks, has 200 greenhouses and consumes 1500 tons of coal for the vineries.t "Cheap coals---cheap grapes," as the editor of the Journal of Horticulture wrote. Grapes in Brussels are certainly not dearer in the beginning of the summer than they are in Switzerland in October. Even in March, Belgian grapes are sold in Covent Garden at from 4d. and 6d. the pound.+ This price alone shows sufficiently how small are the amounts of labour which are required to grow grapes in our latitudes with the aid of glass. // certainly costs less labour to grow grapes in Belgium than to grow them on the coasts of Lake Lenian. 

The various data which have been brought together on the preceding pages make short work of the overpopulation fallacy. It is precisely in the most densely populated parts of the world that agriculture has lately made such strides as hardly could have been guessed twenty years ago. A dense population, a high development of industry, and a high development of agriculture and horticulture, go hand in hand: they are inseparable As to the future, the possibilities of agriculture are such that, in truth, we cannot yet foretell what would be the limit of the population which could live from the produce of a given area. Recent progress, already tested on a great scale, has widened the Hmits of agricultural pro

* I take these figures from the notes which a Belgium professor of agriculture was kind enough to send me. The greenhouses in Belgium are mostly with iron frames. 

t A friend, who has studied practical horticulture in the Channel Islands, writes me of the vineries about Brussels: " You have no idea to what an extent it is done there. Bashford is nothing against it." 

\ A quotation which I took at random, in 1895, from a London daily, was: " Covent Garden, 19th March, 1895. Quotations: Belgian grapes, 4d. to 6d.; Jersey ditto, 6d. to lod.; Muscats, is. 6d. to 2S., and tomatoes, 3d. to 5d. per lb." 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 121 

duction to a quite unforeseen extent; and recent discoveries, now tested on a small scale, promise to widen those limits still farther to a quite unknown degree. 

The present tendency of economical development in ") the world is---we have seen---to induce more and more every nation, or rather every region, taken in its geo-;' graphical sense, to rely chiefly upon a home production j of all the chief necessaries of life. Not to reduce, I mean, the world-exchange: it may still grow in bulk; but to limit it to the exchange of what really ^nust be ■exchanged, and, at the same time, immensely to increase the exchange of novelties, produce of local or national art, new discoveries and inventions, knowledge and ideas. Such being the tendency of present development, there is not the slightest ground to be alarmed by it. There is not one nation in the world which, being armed with the present powers of agriculture, could not grow on its cultivable area all the food and most of the raw materials derived from agriculture which are required for its population, even if the requirements of that population were rapidly increased as they certainly ought to be. Taking the powers of man over the land and over the forces of nature---such as they are at the present day---we can maintain that two to three inhabitants to each cultivable acre of land would not yet be too much. But neither in this densely populated country nor in Belgium are we yet in such numbers. In this country we have, roughly speaking, one acre of the cultivable area per inhabitant. 

Supposing, then, that each inhabitant of Great Britain were compelled to live on the produce of his own land, all he would have to do would be, first, to consider the land of this country as a common inheritance, which must be disposed of to the best advantage of each and all---this is, evidently, an absolutely necessary condition. And next, he would have to cultivate his soil, not in some •extravagant way, but no better than land is already 

)^Jf)L ^Ok-. 

122 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

cultivated upon thousands and thousands of acres in Europe and America. He would not be bound to invent some new methods, but could simply generalise and' widely apply those which have stood the test of experience. He can do it; and in so doing he would save an immense quantity of the work which is now given for buying his food abroad, and for paying all the (intermediaries who live upon this trade. Under a rational culture, those necessaries and those luxuries which must be obtained from the soil, undoubtedly can be obtained with much less work than is required now for buying these commodities. I have made elsewhere (in La Conquete du Pain) approximate calculations tO' that effect, but with the data given in this book every one can himself easily test the truth of this assertion. If we take, indeed, the masses of produce which are obtained under rational culture, and compare them with the amount of labour which must be spent for obtaining them under an irrational culture, for collecting them abroad, for transporting them, and for keeping armies of middlemen, we see at once how few days and hours need be given, under proper culture, for growing man's food. 

For improving our methods of culture to that extent, we surely need not divide the land into one-acre plots, and attempt to grow what we are in need of by every one's separate individual exertions, on every one'sseparate plot with no better tools than the spade; under such conditions we inevitably should fail. Those who have been so much struck with the wonderful results obtained in the petite culture, that they go about representing the small culture of the French peasant, or maraicher, as an ideal for mankind, are evidently mistaken. They are as much mistaken as those other extremists who would hke to turn every country into a • small number of huge Bonanza farms, worked by militarily organised " labour battalions ". In Bonanza farms

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 1 23 

human labour is reduced, but the crops taken from the soil are far too small, and the whole system is robberyculture taking no heed of the exhaustion of the soil; while in the -petite culture, on isolated small plots, by isolated men or families, too much of human labour is wasted even though the crops are heavy. Real economy, of both space and labour, requires quite different methods, representing a combination of machinery work with hand work. 

In agriculture, as in everything else, associated labour is the only reasonable solution. Two hundred families of five persons each, owning five acres per family, having no common ties between the families, and compelled to find their living, each family on its five acres, almost certainly would be an economical failure. Even leaving aside all personal difficulties resulting from different education and tastes and from the want of knowledge as to what has to be done with the land, and admitting for the sake of argument that these causes do not interfere, the experiment would end in a failure, merely for economical, for agricultural reasons. Whatever improvement upon the present conditions such an organisation might be, that improvement would not last; it would have to undergo a further transformation or disappear. 

But the same two hundred families, if they consider themselves, say, as tenants of the nation, and treat the thousand acres as a common tenancy---again leaving aside the personal conditions---would have, economically speaking, from the point of view of the agriculturist, every chance of succeeding, if they know zvhat is the best use to make of that land. 

In such case they probably would first of all associate for permanently improving the land which required immediate improvement, and would consider it necessary to improve more of it every year, until they had brought it all into a perfect condition. On an area of 340 acres they could most easily grow all the cereals---wheat, oats 

124 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

etc.---required for both the thousand inhabitants and their live stock---without resorting for that purpose to replanted or planted cereals. They could grow on 400 acres, properly cultivated, and irrigated if necessary and possible, all the green crops and fodder required to keep the thirty to forty milch cows which would supply them with milk and butter, and, let us say, the 300 head of cattle required to supply them with meat. On twenty acres, two of which would be under glass, they would grow more vegetables, fruit and luxuries than they could consume. And supposing that half an acre of land is attached to each house---for hobbies and amusement (poultry-keeping, or any fancy culture, flowers, and the like)---they would still have some 140 acres for all sorts of purposes: public gardens, squares, manufactures and so on. The labour that would be required for such an intensive culture would not be the hard labour of the serf or slave. It would be accessible to every one, strong or weak, town bred or country born; it would also have many charms besides. And its total amount would be far smaller than the amount of labour which every thousand persons, taken from this or from any other nation, have now to spend in getting tlieir present food, much smaller in quantity and of worse quality. I mean, of course, the technically necessary labour, without even considering the labour which we now have to give in order to maintain all our middlemen, armies, and the like. The amount of labour required to grow food under a rational culture is so small, indeed, that our hypothetical inhabitants would be led necessarily to employ their leisure in manufacturing, artistic, scientific, and other pursuits. 

From the technical point of view there is no obstacle whatever for such an organisation being started tomorrow with full success. The obstacles against it are not in the imperfection of the agricultural art, or in the infertility of the soil, or in climate. They are entirely 

THE POSSIBILITIES OF AGRICULTURE. 1 25 

in our institutions, in our inheritances and survivals from the past---in the " Ghosts " which oppress us. But to some extent they he also---taking society as a whole---in our phenomenal ignorance. We civilised men and women know everything, we have settled opinions upon everything, we take an interest in everything. We only know nothing about whence the bread comes which we eat---even though we pretend to know something about that subject as well---we do not know how it is grown, what pains it costs to those who grow it, what is being done to reduce their pains, what sort of men those feeders of our grand selves are . . . we are more ignorant than savages in this respect, and we prevent our children from obtaining this sort of knowledge---even those of our children who would prefer it to the heaps of useless stuff with which they are crammed at school. 
