# Small Industries and Industrial Villages


CHAPTER VI. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 

Industry and agriculture---The small industries---Different types---Petty trades in Great Britain: Sheffield; Lake District; Birmingham---Petty trades in France---Weaving and various others---The Lyons region---Paris, emporium of petty trades. 

The two sister arts of agriculture and industry were not alwa}'s so estranged from one another as they are now. There was a time, and that time is not so far back, when both were thoroughly combined: the villages were then the seats of a variety of industries, and the artisans in the cities did not abandon agriculture; many towns were nothing else but industrial villages. If the mediaeval city was the cradle of those industries which bordered upon art and were intended to supply the wants of the richer classes, still it was the rural manufacture which supplied the wants of the million, as it does until the present day in Russia, and to a very great extent in Germany and France. But then came the water-motors, steam, the development of machinery, and they broke the link which formerly connected the farm with the workshop. Factories grew up and they abandoned the fields. They gathered where the sale of their produce was easiest, or the raw materials and fuel could be obtained with the greatest advantage. New cities rose, and the old ones rapidly enlarged; the fields were deserted. ]\Iillions of labourers, driven away by sheer force from the land, gathered in the cities in search of labour, and 

(126) 

I 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 12/ 

soon forgot the bonds which formerly attached them to the soil. And we, in our admiration of the prodigies achieved under the new factory system, overlooked the advantages of the old system under which the tiller of the soil was an industrial worker at the same time. We doomed to disappearance all those branches of industry which formerly used to prosper in the villages; we condemned as industry all that was not a big factory. 

True, the results were grand as regards the increase of the productive powers of man. But they proved terrible as regards the millions of human beings who were plunged into misery and had to rely upon precarious means of living in our cities. Moreover, the system, as a whole, brought about those abnormal conditions which I have endeavoured to sketch in the two first chapters. We are thus driven into a corner; and while a thorough change in the present relations between labour and capital is becoming an imperious necessity, a thorough remodelling of the whole of our industrial organisation has also become unavoidable. The industrial nations are bound to revert to agriculture, they are compelled to find out the best means of combining it with industry, and they must do so without loss of time. 

To examine the special question as to the possibility of such a combination is the aim of the following pages. Is it possible, from a technical point of view? Is it desirable? Are there, in our present industrial life, such features as might lead usto presume that a change in the above direction would find the necessary elements for its accomplishment? Such are the questions which rise before the mind. And to answer them, there is, I suppose, no better means than to study that immense but overlooked and underrated branch of industries which are described under the names of rural industries, domestic trades, and petty trades -. to study them, not in the works of the economists who are too much inclined 

128 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

to consider them as obsolete types of industry, but in their life itself, in their struggles, their failures and achievements. 

The variety of forms of organisation which prevails in the small industries is hardly suspected by those who have not made them a subject of special study. There are, first, two broad categories: those industries which are carried on in the villages, in connection with agriculture; and those which are carried on in towns or in villages, with no connection with the land---the workers depending for their earnings exclusively upon their industrial work. In Russia, in France, in Germany, in Austria, and so on, millions and millions of workers are in the first case. They are owners or occupiers of the land, they keep one or two cows, very often horses, and they cultivate their fields, or their orchards, or gardens, considering industrial work as a by-occupation. In those regions, especially, where the winter is long and no work on the land is possible for several months every year, this form of small industries is widely spread. In this country, on the contrary, we find the opposite extreme. Few small industries have survived in England in connection with land-culture; but hundreds of petty trades are found in the suburbs and the slums of the big cities, and large portions of the populations of several towns, such as Sheffield and Birmingham, find their living in a variety of petty trades. Between these two extremes there is evidently a mass of intermediate forms, according to the more or less close ties which continue to exist with the land. Large villages, and even towns, are thus peopled with workers who are engaged in small trades, but most of whom have a small garden, or an orchard, or a field, or only retain some rights of pasture on the commons, while part of them live exclusively upon their industrial earnings. With regard to the sale of the produce, the small industries offer the same variety of organisation. Here 

I 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 29 

again there are two great branches. In one of them the worker sells his produce directly to the wholesale " dealer; cabinet-makers and part of the workers in the toy trade are in this case. In the other great division the worker works for a " master " who either sells the produce to a wholesale dealer, or simply acts as a middleman who himself receives his orders from some big concern. This is the " sweating system," properly speaking, under which we find a mass of small trades: part of the toy trade, the tailors who work for big clothing establishments---very often for those of the State---the women who sew and embroider the " uppers " for the boot and shoe factories, and who as often deal with the factory as with an intermediary " sweater," and so on. All possible gradations of feudalisation and sub-feudalisation of labour are evidently found in that organisation of the sale of the produce. 

Again, when the industrial, or rather technical aspects of the small industries are considered, the same variety of types is soon discovered. Here also there are two great branches: those trades, on the one side, which are purely domestic---that is, those which are carried on in the house of the worker, with the aid of his family, or of a couple of wage-workers; and those which are carried on in separate workshops---all the just-mentioned varieties, as regards connection with land and the divers modes of disposing of the produce, being met with in both these branches. All possible trades---weaving, workers in wood, in metals, in bone, in india-rubber, and so on---may be found under the category of purely domestic trades, with all possible gradations betvveen the purely domestic form of production and the workshop and the factory. 

Thus, by the side of the trades which are carried on entirely at home by one or more members of the family, there are the trades in which the master keeps a small workshop attached to his house, where he works 

9 

130 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

with his family, or with a few " assistants," i.e., wageworkers. Or else the artisan has a separate workshop, supplied with wheel-power, as is the case with the Sheffield cutlers. Or several workers come together in a small factory which they maintain themselves, or hire in association, or where they are allowed to work for a certain weekly rent. And in each of these cases they work either directly for the dealer or for a small master, or for a middleman. A further development of this system is the big factory, especially of ready-made cloth, in which hundreds of women pay so much for the sewingmachine, the gas, the gas-heated irons, and so on, and are paid themselves so much for each piece of the ready-made cloth they sew, or each part of it. Immense factories of this kind exist in England, and it appeared from testimony given before the " Sweating Committee " that women are fearfully " sweated " in such workshops---the full price of each slightly spoiled piece of clothing being deducted from their very low piecework wages. And, finally, there is the small workshop Toften with hired wheel-power) in which a master employs three to ten workers, who are paid in wages, and sells his produce to a bigger employer or merchant---there being all possible gradations between such a workshop and the small factory in which a few time workers (five, ten to twenty) are employed by an independent producer. Moreover, in the textile trades, weaving is often done either by the family or by a master who employs one boy only, or several weavers, and after having received the yarn from a big employer, pays a skilled workman to put the yarn in the loom, invents what is necessary for weaving a given, sometimes very complicated pattern, and after having woven the cloth or the ribbons in his own loom or in a loom which he hires himself, he is paid for the piece of cloth according to a very complicated scale of wages agreed to between masters and workers. This last form, we shall see presently, is widely spread 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 13I 

until now, especially in the woollen and silk trades, by the side of big factories in which 50, 100, or 5000 wageworkers, as the case may be, are working with the employers' machinery and are paid in time -wages so much the day or the week. 

The small industries are thus quite a world, which, remarkable enough, continues to exist even in the mostindustrial countries, side by side with the big factories. Into this world we must now penetrate to cast a glimpse upon it: a glimpse only, because it would take volumes to describe its infinite variety of pursuits and organisation, and its infinitely varied connection, with agriculture as well as with other industries. 

Most of the petty trades, except some of those which are connected with agriculture, are, we must admit, in a very precarious position. The earnings are very low, and the employment is often uncertain. The day of labour is by two, three, or four hours longer than it is in well-organised factories, and at certain seasons it reaches an almost incredible length. The crises are frequent and last for years. Altogether, the worker is much more at the mercy of the dealer, or the employer, and the employer is at the mercy of the wholesale dealer. Both are liable to become enslaved to the latter, running into debt to him. In some of the petty trades, especially in the fabrication of the plain textiles, the workers are in dreadful misery. But those who pretend that such misery is the rule are totally wrong. Any one who has lived among, let us say, the watchmakers in Switzerland and knows their inner family life, will recognise that the condition of these workers is out of all comparison superior, in every respect, material and moral, to the conditions of millions of factory hands. Even during such a crisis in the watch trade as was lived through in 1876-80, their condition was preferable to the condition of factory hands during a crisis in the woollen 

132 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

or cotton trade; and the workers perfectly well knew it themselves. 

Whenever a crisis breaks out in some branch of the petty trades there is no lack of writers to predict that that trade is going to disappear. During the crisis which I witnessed in 1877 amidst the Swiss watchmakers, the impossibility of a recovery of the trade in the face of the competition of machine-made watches was a current topic in the press. The same was said in 1882 with regard to the silk trade of Lyons, and, in fact, wherever a crisis has broken out in the petty trades. And yet, notwithstanding the gloomy predictions, and the still gloomier prospects of the workers, that form of industry does not disappear. Nay, we find it endowed with an astonishing vitality. It undergoes various modifications, it adapts itself to new conditions, it struggles without losing hope of better times to come. Anyhow, it has not the characteristics of a decaying institution. In some industries the factory is undoubtedly victorious; but there are other branches in which the petty trades hold their own position. Even in the textile industries, which offer so man.y advantages for the factory system, the hand-loom still competes with the power-loom. 

As a whole, the transformation of the petty trades into great industries goes on with a slowness which cannot fail to astonish even those who are convinced of its necessity. Nay, sometimes we may even see the reverse movement going on---occasionally, of course, and only for a time. I cannot forget my amazement when I saw at Verviers, some twenty years ago, that most of the woollen cloth factories---immense barracks facing the streets by more than a hundred windows each---were silent, and their costly machinery was rusting, while cloth was woven in hand-looms in the weavers' houses, for the owners of those very same factories. Here we have, of course, but a temporary fact, fully explained by the spasmodic character of the trade and the heavy 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 33 

losses sustained by the owners of the factories when they cannot run their mills all the year round. But it illustrates the obstacles which the transformation has to comply with. As to the silk trade, it continues to spread over Europe in its rural industry shape; while hundreds of new petty trades appear every year, and when they find nobody to carry them on in the villages---as is the case in this country---they shelter themselves in the suburbs of the great cities, as we have lately learned from the inquiry into the " sweating system ". 

Now, the advantages offered by a large factory in comparison with hand work are self-evident as regards the economy of labour, and especially the facilities both for sale and for having the raw produce at a lower price. How can we then explain the persistence of the petty trades .'' Many causes, however, most of which cannot be valued in shillings and pence, are at work in favour of the petty trades, and these causes will be best seen from the following illustrations. I must say, however, that even a brief sketch of the countless industries which are carried on on a small scale in this country, and on the Continent, would be far beyond the scope of this chapter. When I began to study the subject some fifteen years ago, I never guessed, from the little attention devoted to it by the orthodox economists, what a wide, complex, important, and interesting organisation would appear at the end of a closer inquiry. So I see myself compelled to give here only a few typical illustrations, and to indicate the chief lines only of the subject. 

Petty Trades in Great Britain. 

As far as I know, there are in this country no statistics as to the exact numbers of workers engaged in the domestic trades, the rural industries, and the petty trades. The whole subject has never received the 

134 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

attention bestowed upon it in Germany, and especially in Russia. And yet we can guess that even in this country of great industries, the numbers of those who earn their livelihood in the petty trades most probably equal, if they do not surpass, the numbers of those employed in the factories.* We know, at any rate, that the suburbs of London, Glasgow, and other great cities swarm with small workshops, and there are regions where the petty trades are as developed as they are in Switzerland or in Germany. Sheffield is a well-known example in point. The Sheffield cutlery---one of the glories of England---is not made by machinery: it is chiefly made by hand. There are at Sheffield a few firms which manufacture cutlery right through from the making of steel to the finishing of tools, and employ wage-workers; and yet even these firms---I am told by Edward Carpenter, who kindly collected for me information about the Sheffield trade---let out some part of their work to the " small masters ". But by far the greatest number of the cutlers work in their homes with their relatives, or in small workshops supplied with wheel-power, which they rent for a few shillings a week. Immense yards are covered with buildings, which are subdivided into numbers of small workshops. Some of these cover but a few square yards, and there I saw smiths hammering, all the day long, blades of knives on a small anvil, close by the blaze of their fires; occasionally the smith may have one helper, or two. In the upper storeys scores of small workshops are supplied with wheel-power, and in each of them, three, four, or five workers and a " master " fabricate, with the occasional aid of a few plain machines, every description of tools: files, saws, 

* We find it stated in various economic works that there are nearly 1,000,000 workers employed in the big factories of England alone, and 1,047,000 employed in the petty trades---the various trades connected with food (bakers, butchers, and so on) and the building trades being included in the last figure. But I do not know how far these figures are reliable. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 35 

blades of knives, razors, and so on. Grinding and glazing are done in other small workshops, and even steel is cast in a small foundry, the working staff of which consists only of five or six men. When walking through these workshops I easily imagined myself in a Russian cutlery village, like Pavlovo or Vorsma. The Sheffield cutlery has thus maintained its olden organisation, and the fact is the more remarkable as the earnings of the cutlers are low as a rule; but, even when reduced to a few shillings a week, the cutler prefers to vegetate on his small earnings than to enter as a waged labourer in a " house ". The spirit of the old trade organisations, which were so much spoken of five-and-twenty years ago, is thus still alive. 

Until lately, Leeds and its environs were also the seat of extensive domestic industries. When Edward Baines wrote, in 1857, his first account of the Yorkshire industries (in Th. Baines's Yorkshire^ Past and Present), most of the woollen cloth which was made in that region was woven by hand.* Twice a week the hand-made cloth was brought to the Clothiers' Hall, and by noon it was sold to the merchants, who had it dressed in their factories. Joint-stock mills were run by combined clothiers in order to prepare and spin the wool, but it was woven in the hand-looms by the clothiers and the members of their families. Twelve years later the handloom was superseded to a great extent by the powerloom; but the clothiers, who were anxious to maintain their independence, resorted to a peculiar organisation: they rented a room, or part of a room, and sometimes also the power-looms in a workshop, and they worked independently---a characteristic organisation partly maintained until now, and well adapted to illustrate the 

* Nearly one-half of the 43,000 operatives who were employed at that time in the woollen trade of this country were weaving in handlooms. So also one-fifth of the 79,000 persons employed in the worsted trade. 

136 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

efforts of the petty traders to keep their ground, notwithstanding the competition of the factory. And it must be said that the triumphs of the factory were too often achieved only by means of the most fraudulent adulteration and the underpaid labour of the children. Cotton warp became quite usual in goods labelled " pure wool," and " shoddy "---i.e., wool combed out of old rags gathered all over the Continent and formerly used only for blankets fabricated for the Indians in America---became of general use. In these kinds of goods the factories excelled. And yet there are branches of the woollen trade where hand-work is still the rule, especially in the fancy goods which continually require new adaptations for temporary demands. Thus, not farther than in 1881 the hand-looms of Leeds were pretty well occupied with the fabrication of woollen imitations of sealskins. 

The variety of domestic industries carried on in the Lake District is much greater than might be expected, but they still wait for careful explorers. I will only mention the hoop-makers, the basket trade, the charcoalburners, the bobbin-makers, the small iron furnaces working with charcoal at Backbarrow, and so on.* As a whole, we do not well know the petty trades of this country, and therefore we sometimes come across quite unexpected facts. Few continental writers on industrial topics would guess, indeed, that nails are still made by hand by thousands of men, women, and children in the Black Country of South Staffordshire, as also in Derbyshire,! or that the best needles are made by hand at Redditch. Chains are also made by hand at Dudley and Cradley, and although the press is periodically moved to speak of the wretched condition of the chain-makers, men and women, the trade still maintains itself; while nearly 7000 men are busy in their small workshops in 

* E. Roscoe's notes in the English Illustrated Magazine, May, 1884. + Bevan's Guide to English Industries. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 3/ 

making locks, even of the plainest description, at Walsall, Wolverhampton, and Willenhall. The various ironmongeries connected with horse-clothing---bits, spurs, bridles, and so on---are also largely made by hand •at Walsall. 

The Birmingham gun and rifle trades, which also belong to the same domain of small industries, are well known. As to the various branches of dress, there are still important divisions of the United Kingdom where a variety of domestic trades connected with dress is carried on on a large scale. I need only mention the •cottage industries of Ireland, as also some of them which have survived in the shires of Buckingham, Oxford, and Bedford; hosiery is a common occupation in the villages of the counties of Nottingham and Derby; and several great London firms send out cloth to be made into dress in the villages of Sussex and Hampshire. Woollen hosiery is at home in the villages of Leicester, and especially in Scotland; straw-plaiting and hatmaking in many parts of the country; while at Northampton, Leicester, Ipswich, and Stafford shoemaking was, till quite lately, a widely spread domestic occupation, or was carried on in small workshops; even at Norwich it remains a petty trade to some extent, notwithstanding the competition of the factories. It must also be said that the recent appearance of large boot and shoe factories has considerably increased the numbers of girls and women who sew the " uppers," either in their own houses or in sweaters' workshops. 

The petty trades are thus an important factor of industrial life even in Great Britain, although many of them have gathered into the towns. But if we find in this country so many fewer rural industries than on the Continent, we must not imagine that their disappearance is due only to a keener competition of the factories. The chief cause was the compulsory exodus from the villages. 

138 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

As every one knows from Thorold Roger's work,, or, at least, from Toynbee's lectures, the growth of the factory system in England was intimately connected with that enforced exodus. Whole industries, which prospered in the country, were killed downright by the forced clearing of estates.* The workshops, much more even than the factories, multiply wherever they find cheap labour; and the specific feature of this country is, that the cheapest labour---that is, the greatest number of destitute people---is to be found in the great cities. The agitation raised (with no result) in connection with the " DweUings of the Poor," the " Unemployed," and the " Sweating System," has fully disclosed that characteristic feature of the economic life of England and Scotland; and the painstaking researches made by Mr. Charles Booth have shown that one-quarter of the population of London---that is, 1,000,000 out of 3,800,000---would be happy if the heads of their families could have regular earnings of something like £1 a week all the year round. Half of them would be satisfied with even less than that. Cheap labour is offered in such quantities at Whitechapel and Southwark, and in the suburbs of all the great cities of Great Britain, that the petty and domestic trades which are scattered on the Continent in the villages, gather in this country in the cities. Exact figures as to the small industries are wanting, but a simple walk through the suburbs of London would do much to realise the variety of petty trades which swarm in the metropolis, and, in fact, in all chief urban agglomerations. The evidence given before the " Sweating System Committee " has shown how far the furniture and ready-made clothing palaces and the " Bonheur des Dames " bazaars of London are often mere exhibitions of samples, or markets for the sale of the produce of the small industries. Thou

* Thorold Rogers, The Economic Interpretation of History; Arn. Toynbee, Lectures on the Industrial Revolution in England. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 39 

sands of sweaters, some of them having their own workshops, and others merely distributing work to subsweaters who distribute it again amidst the destitute, supply those palaces and bazaars with goods made in the slums or in very small workshops. The commerce is centralised in those bazaars---not the industry. The furniture palaces and bazaars are thus merely playing the part which the feudal castle formerly played in agriculture: they centralise the profits---not the production. 

In reality the extension of the petty trades, side by side with the great factories, is nothing to be wondered at. It is an economic necessity. The absorption of the small industries by bigger concerns is a fact, but there is another process which is going on parallel with the former, and which consists in the continuous creation of new industries, usually making their start on a small scale. Each new factory calls into existence a number of small workshops, partly to supply its own needs and partly to submit its produce to a further transformation. Thus, to quote but one instance, the cotton mills have created an immense demand for wooden bobbins and reels, and thousands of men in the Lake District set to manufacture them---by hand first, and later on with the aid of some plain machinery. Only quite recently, after years had been spent in inventing and improving the machinery, the bobbms began to be made on a larger scale in factories. And even yet, as the machines are very costly, a great quantity of bobbins are made in small workshops, with but little aid from machines, while the factories themselves are relatively small, and seldom employ more than fifty operatives---chiefly children. As to the reels of irregular shape, they are still made by hand, or partly in small machines continually invented by the workers. New industries thus grow up to supplant the old ones; each of them passes through a preliminary stage on a small scale before reaching 

140 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

the factory stage; and the more active the inventive genius of a nation is, the more it has of these budding industries. The countless small bicycle works which have lately grown up in this country, and are supplied with ready-made parts of the bicycle by the larger factories, are an instance in point As also the domestic fabrication of boxes for matches, boots, hats, confectionery, and so on. 

Besides, the factory stimulates the birth of new petty trades by creating new wants. The cheapness of cottons and woollens, of paper and brass, has created hundreds of new small industries. Our households are full of their produce---mostly things of quite modern invention. And while some of them already are turned out by the million in the factory, all have passed through the small workshop stage before the demand was great enough to require the factory organisation. The more we may have of new inventions, the more shall we have of such small industries; and again, the more we have of them, the more shall we have of the inventive genius, the want of which is so justly complained of in this country (by W. Armstrong, amongst many others). We must not wonder, therefore, if we see so many small trades in this country; but we must regret that the great number liave abandoned the villages in consequence of the bad conditions of land tenure, and that they have migrated in such numbers to the cities, to the detriment of agriculture. 

Pet^y Trades in France. 

Small industries are met with in France in a very ^reat variety, and they represent a most important feature of national economy. It is estimated, in fact, that while one-half of the population of France live upon agriculture, and one-fourth upon industry, this fourth part is equally distributed between the great 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. I4I 

industry and the small ones, which last would thus occupy about 1,500,000 workers and support 4,000,000 to 5,000,000 persons. A considerable number of peasants who resort to small industries without abandoning agriculture would have to be added to the justmentioned items, and the additional earnings which these peasants find in industry are so important that in several parts of France peasant proprietorship could not be maintained without the aid derived from the rural industries. 

The small peasants know what they have to expect the day they become factory hands in a town; and so long as they have not been dispossessed by the money-lender of their lands and houses, and so long as the village rights in the communal grazing grounds or woods have not been lost, they cling to a combination of industry with agriculture. Having, in most cases, no horses to plough the land, they resort to an arrangement which is widely spread, if not universal, among small French landholders, even in purely rural districts (I saw it even in Haute-Savoie). One of the peasants who keeps a plough and a team of horses, tills all the fields in turn. At the same time, owing to a wide maintenance of the communal spirit, which I have described elsewhere,* further support is found in the communal shepherd, the communal wine-press, and various forms of " aids " amongst the peasants. And wherever the village-community spirit is maintained the small industries persist, while no effort is spared to bring the small plots under higher culture. 

Market-gardening and fruit culture often go hand in hand with small industries. And wherever wellbeing is found on a relatively unproductive soil, it is nearly always due to a combination of the two sister arts. 

* Nineteenth Century, March, 1896. 

142 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

The most wonderful adaptations of the small industries to new requirements, and substantial technical progress in the methods of production, can be noted at the same time. It may even be said of France, as it has been said of Russia, that when a rural industry dies out, the cause of its decay is found much less in the competition of rival factories---in hundreds of localities the small industry undergoes a complete modification, or it changes its character in such cases---than in the decay of the population as agriculturists. Continually we see that only when the small landholders have been ruined, as such, by a group of causes---the loss of communal meadows, or abnormally high rents, or the havoc made in some locality by the viarchands de biens (swindlers enticing the peasants to buy land for credit), or the bankruptcy of some shareholders' company whose shares had been eagerly taken by the peasants *---do they abandon both the land and the rural industry and emigrate towards the towns. Otherwise, a new industry always grows up when the competition of the factory becomes too acute---a wonderful, hardly suspected adaptability being displayed by the small industries; or else the rural artisans resort to some form of intensive farming, gardening, etc., and in the meantime some other industry makes its appearance. 

It is evident that in most textile industries the powerloom supersedes the hand-loom, and the factory takes, or has taken already, the place of the cottage industry. Cottons, plain linen, and machine-made lace are now produced at such a low cost by machinery, that handweaving evidently becomes an anachronism for the plainest descriptions of such goods. Consequently, though there were in France, in the year 1876, 328,300 hand-looms as against 121,340 power-looms, it may safely be taken that the number of the former has been 

* See Baudrillart's hes Populations agricoles de la France: Normandie. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. I43 

considerably reduced within the last twenty years. However, the slowness with which this change is being accomplished is one of the most striking features of the present industrial organisation of the textile trades of France. 

The causes of this power of resistance of hand-loomweaving become especially apparent when one consults such works as Reybaud's Le Coton, which was written in 1863, more than thirty years ago---that is, at a time when the cottage industries were still fully alive. Though an ardent admirer himself of the great industries, Reybaud faithfully noted the striking superiority of [Well-being in the weavers' cottages, as compared with the misery of the factory hands in the cities. Already, then, 'the cities of St. Quentin, Lille, Roubaix and Amiens were great centres for cotton-spinning mills and cottonweaving factories. But, at the same time, all sorts of cottons were woven in hand-looms, in the very suburbs of St. Quentin and in a hundred villages and hamlets around it, to be sold for finishing in the city. And Reybaud remarked that the horrible dwellings in town, and the general condition of the factory hands, stood in a wonderful contrast with the relative welfare of the rural weavers. Nearly every one of these last had his own house and a small field which he continued to cultivate.* 

Even in such a branch as the fabrication of plain cotton velvets, in which the competition of the factories was especially keenly felt, home-weaving was widely spread, in 1863 and even in 1878, in the villages round Amiens. Although the earnings of the rural weavers were small, as a rule, the weavers preferred to keep to their own cottages, to their own crops and to their own cattle; and only repeated commercial crises, as well as several of the above-mentioned causes, hostile to the 

* he Coton, p. 170. 

144 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS.. 

small peasant, compelled most of them to give up the struggle, and to seek employment in the factories, while part of them have, by this time, again returned to agriculture or taken to market-gardening. 

Another important centre for rural industries was in the neighbourhood of Rouen, where no less than 110,000 persons were employed, in 1863, in weaving^ cottons for the finishing factories of that city. In the valley of the Andelle, in the department of Eure, each village was at that time an industrial bee-hive; each streamlet was utilised for setting into work a small factory. Re}'baud described the condition of the peasants who combined agriculture with work at the rural factory as most satisfactory, especially in comparison with the condition of the slum-dwellers at Rouen, and he even mentioned a case or two in which the village factories belonged to the village communities. 

Seventeen years later, Baudrillart * depicted the same region in very much the same words; and although the rural factories had had to yield to a great extent before the big factories, the rural industry was still valued as showing a yearly production of 85,000,000 francs 

(;^2,400,000). 

At the present time, the factories must have made further progress; but we still see from the excellent descriptions of M. Ardouin Dumazet, whose work will have in the future almost the same value as Arthur Young's Travels,^ that a considerable portion of the rural weavers has still survived; while at the same time one invariably meets, even nowadays, with the remark that relative well-being is prominent in the villages in which weaving is connected with agriculture. All taken, we must, however, say that in northern France, where cottons are fabricated on a large scale in factory 

* Les Populations agricoles de la France: Normandie. t Voyage en France. Paris, 1893-7 (Berget-Levreau, publishers)^ 10 vols. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. I45 

towns, hand-weaving in the villages is nearly gone. But things have a different aspect when we take other regions of France, where other industries prevail. 

Taking the region situated between Rouen in the north-east, Orleans in the south-east, Rennes in the north-west, and Nantes in the south-west, that is, the old provinces of Normandy, Perche and Maine, and partly Touraine and Anjou, as they were seen by Ardouin Dumazet in 1895, we find there quite a variety of domestic and petty industries, both in the villages and in the towns. 

At Laval (to the south-east of Rennes), where drills (coutils) were formerly woven out of flax in hand-looms, and at Alengon, formerly a great centre for the cottageweaving of linen, as well as for hand-made lace, Ardouin Dumazet found both the house and the factory linen industry in a lingering state. Cotton takes the lead. Drills are now made out of cotton in the factories, and the demand for flax goods is very small. Both domestic and factory weaving of flax goods are accordingly in a poor condition. The cottagers abandon that branch of weaving, and the large factories which had been erected at Alenjon, with the intention of creating a flax and hemp-cloth industry, had to be closed. Only one factory, occupying 250 hands, remains; while nearly 23,000 weavers who found occupation at Mans, Fresnay and Alencon in hemp cloths and fine linen had to abandon that industry. Those who worked in factories have emigrated to other towns, while those who had not broken with agriculture reverted to it. In this struggle of cotton versus flax and hemp, the former was victorious. 

As to lace, it is made in such quantities by machinery at Calais, Caudry, St. Quentin and Tarare that only high-class artistic lace-making continues on a small scale at Alengon itself, but it still remains a by-occupation in the surrounding country. Besides, at Flers, and at Fertd Macd (a small town to the south of the former), 

10 

146 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

hand-weaving is still carried on in about 5400 handlooms, although the whole trade, in factories and villages alike, is in a piteous state since the Spanish markets have been lost. Spain has now plenty of her own cotton mills. Twelve big spinning mills at Coud^ (where 4000 tons of cotton were spun in 1883) were abandoned in 1893, and the workers were thrown into a most miserable condition.* 

On the contrary, in an industry which supplies the home market, namely in the fabrication of linen handkerchiefs, which itself is of a quite recent growth, we see that cottage-weaving is, even now, in full prosperity. Cholet (in Maine-et-Loire, south-west of Angers) is the centre of that trade. It has one spinning mill and one weaving mill, but both employ considerably fewer hands than domestic weaving, which is spread in no less than 200 villages of the surrounding region.t Neither at Rouen nor in the industrial cities of Northern France are so many linen handkerchiefs fabricated as in this region in hand-looms, we are told by Ardouin Dumazet 

Within the curve made by the Loire as it flows past Orleans we find another prosperous centre of domestic industries connected with cottons. " From Romorantin [in Loire-et-Cher, south of Orleans] to Argenton and Le Blanc," the same writer says, " we have one immense workshop where handkerchiefs are embroidered, and shirts, cuffs, collars and all sorts of ladies' linen are sewn or embroidered. There is not one house, even in the tiniest hamlets, where the women would not be occupied in that trade . . . and if this work is a mere -passetemps in vine-growing regions, here it has become the chief resource of the population." + Even at Romorantin itself, where 400 women and girls are employed in one factory, there are more than 1000 women who sew 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. ii., p. 167. 

f In Maine-et-Loire, la Vendee, Loire Inferieure, and Deux-Sevres. 

J Ardouin Dumazet, vol. i., p. 117 et seq. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. I47 

linen in their houses. The same must be said of a group of industrial villages, peopled with clothiers in the neighbourhood of another Normandy city, Elboeuf. When Baudrillart visited them in 1878-80, he was struck with the undoubted advantages offered by a combination of agriculture with industry. Clean houses, clean dresses, and a general stamp of well-being were characteristic of these villages. 

Happily enough, weaving is not the only small industry of both this region and Brittany. On the contrary, scores of other small industries enliven the villages and burgs. At Fougeres (in Ille-et-Vilaine, to the north-east of Reims) one sees how the factory has contributed to the development of various small and domestic trades. In 1830 this town was a great centre for the domestic fabrication of the so-called chaussons de tresse. The competition of the prisons killed, however, this primitive industry; but it was soon substituted by the fabrication of soft socks in felt {chaussons de feuire). This last industry also went down, and then the fabrication of boots and shoes was introduced, this last giving origin, in its turn, to the boot and shoe factories, of which there are now thirty-three at Fougeres, employing 8000 workers (yearly production about 5,000,000 pairs). But at the same time domestic industries took a new development. Thousands of women are employed now in their houses in sewing the " uppers " and in embroidering fancy shoes. Moreover, quite a number of smaller workshops grew up in the neighbourhood, for the fabrication of cardboard boxes, wooden heels, and so on, as well as a number of tanneries, big and small. And M. Ardouin Dumazet's remark is, that one is struck to find owing to these industries an undoubtedly higher level of well-being in the villages---quite unforeseen in the centre of this purely agricultural region.* 

* Vol. v., p. 270. 

148 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

In Brittany, in the neighbourhood of QuimperM, a great number of small workshops for the fabrication of the felt hats which are worn by the peasants is scattered in the villages; and rapidly improving agriculture goes hand in hand with that trade. Well-being is a distinctive feature of these villages.* At Hennebout (on the southern coast of Brittany) 1400 workers are employed in an immense factory in the fabrication of tins for preserves, and every year twenty-two to twentythree tons of iron are transformed into steel, and next into tins, which are sent to Paris, Bordeaux, Nantes, and so on. But the factory has created " quite a world of tiny workshops " in this purely agricultural region: small tin-ware workshops, tanneries, potteries, and so on, while the slags are transformed in small workshops into manure. Agriculture and industry go here hand in hand, the importance of not severing the union being perhaps best seen at Loud^ac, a small town in the midst of Brittany (department of C6tes-du-Nord). Formerly the villages in this neighbourhood were industrial, all hamlets being peopled with weavers who fabricated the well-known Brittany linen. Now, this industry having very much gone down, the weavers have simply returned to the soil. Out of an industrial town, Louddac has become an agricultural market town; t and, what is most interesting, these populations conquer new lands for agriculture and turn the formerly quite unproductive landes into rich corn fields; while on the northern coast of Brittany, around Dol, on land which began to be conquered from the sea in the twelfth century, marketgardening is now carried on to a very great extent for export to England. Altogether, it is striking to observe, on perusing M. Ardouin Dumazet's little volumes, how domestic industries go hand in hand with all sorts of small industries in agriculture---gardening, poultry-farming, 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. v., p. 215. t Ih'id., vol. v., pp. 259-266. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. I49 

fabrication of fruit preserves, and so on, and how all sorts of associations for sale and export are easily introduced. Mans is, as known, a great centre for the export of geese and all sorts of poultry to England. 

Part of Normandy (namely, the departments of Eure and Orne) is dotted with small workshops where all sorts of small brass goods and hardware are still fabricated in the villages. Of course, the domestic fabrication of pins is nearly gone, and as for needles, polishing only, in a very primitive form, has been maintained in the villages. But all sorts of small hardware, including nails, lockets, etc., in great variety, are fabricated in the villages, especially round Laigle. Stays are also sewn in small workshops in many villages, notwithstanding the competition of prison work* 

Tinchebrai (to the west of Flers) is a real centre for a great variety of smaller goods in iron, mother-of-pearl and horn. All sorts of hardware and locks are fabricated by the peasants during the time they can spare from agriculture, and real works of art, some of which were much admired at the exhibition of 1889, are produced by these humble peasant sculptors in horn, mother-of-pearl and iron. Farther south, the polishing of marble goods is carried on in numbers of small workshops scattered round Solesmes and grouped round one central establishment where marble pieces are roughly shaped with the aid of steam, to be finished in the small village workshops. At Sabld the workers in that branch, who all own their houses and gardens, enjoy a real wellbeing especially noticed by our traveller.! 

In the woody regions of the Perche and the Maine we find all sorts of wooden industries which evidently could only be maintained owing to the communal possession of the woods. Near the forest of Perseigne there 

* I gave, a few years ago, some information about French prison work in a book. In Russian and French Prisons, London, 1888. t Ardouin Dumazet, vol. ii., p. 51. 

I50 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

is a small burg, Fresnaye, which is entirely peopled with workers in wood. 

" There is not one house," Ardouin Dumazet writes, " in which wooden goods would not be fabricated. Some years ago there was little variety in their produce; spoons, salt-boxes, shepherds' boxes, scales, various wooden pieces for weavers, flutes and hautboys, spindles, wooden measures, funnels, and wooden bowls were only made. But Paris wanted to have a thousand things in which wood was combined with iron; mouse-traps, cloak-pegs, spoons for jam, brooms. . . . And now every house has a workshop containing either a turning-lathe, or some machinetools for chopping wood, for making lattice-work, and so on. . . . Quite a new industry was born, and the most coquettish things are now fabricated. Owing to this industry the population is happy. The earnings are not high, but each worker owns his house and garden, and occasionally a bit of field." * 

At Neufchatel wooden shoes are made, and the hamlet, we are told, has a most smiling aspect. To every house a garden is attached, and none of the misery of big cities is to be seen. At Jupilles and in the surrounding countryother varieties of wooden goods are produced: tapes, boxes of different kinds, together with wooden shoes; while at the forest of Vibraye two workshops have been erected for turning out umbrella handles by the million for all France. One of these workshops having been founded by a worker sculptor, he has invented and introduced in his workshop the most ingenious machine-tools. About 150 men work at this factory; but it is evident that half a dozen smaller workshops, scattered in the villages, would have answered equally well. 

Going now over to a quite different region---the Ni^vre, in the centre of France, and Haute Marne, in the east---^we find that both regions are great centres for a variety of small industries, some of which are maintained by associations of workers, while others have grown up in the shadow of factories. The small iron workshops which formerly covered the country have not disappeared: they have undergone a transformation; 

* Vol. i., pp. 305, 306. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 151 

and now the country is covered with small workshops where agricultural machinery, chemical produce, and pottery are fabricated; " one ought to go as far as Gu^rigny and Fourchambault to find the great industry; " * while a number of small workshops for the fabrication of a variety of hardware flourish by the side of, and owing to the proximity of, the industrial centres. Pottery makes the fortune of the valley of the Loire about Nevers. High-class art pottery is made in this town, while in the villages plain pottery is fabricated and exported by merchants who go about with their boats, selling it. At Gien a large factor}^ of china buttons (made out of felspar-powder cemented with milk) has lately been established, and employs 1 500 workmen, who produce from 3500 to 4500 lb. of buttons every day. And, as is often the case, part of the work is done in the villages. For many miles on both banks of the Loire, in all villages, old people, women and children sew the buttons to the cardboard pieces. Of course, that sort of work is wretchedly paid; but it is resorted to only because there is no other sort of industry in the neighbourhood to which the peasants could give their leisure time. 

In the same region of the Haute Marne, especially in the neighbourhood of Nogent, we find cutlery as a by-occupation to agriculture. Landed property is very much subdivided in that part of France, and great numbers of peasants own but from two to three acres per family, or even less. Consequently, in thirty villages round Nogent, about 5000 men are engaged in cutlery, chiefly of the highest sort (artistic knives are occasionally sold at as much as ^^20 a piece), while the lower sorts are fabricated in the neighbourhoods of Thiers, in Puyde-D6me (Auvergne). The Nogent industry has developed spontaneously without any aid from without, 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. i., p. 52. 

152 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

and in its technical part it shows considerable progress; * while at Thiers, where the cheapest sorts of cutlery are made, the division of labour, the cheapness of rent for small workshops supplied with motive power from the Durolle river, or from small gas motors, the aid of a great variety of specially invented machine-tools, and the existing combination of machine-work with hand-work have resulted in such a perfection of the technical part of the trade that it is considered doubtful whether the factory system could further economise labour. t For twelve miles round Thiers, in each direction, all the streamlets are dotted with small workshops, in which peasants, who continue to cultivate their fields, are at work. 

Basket-making is again an important cottage industry in several parts of France, namely in Aisne and in Haute Marne. In this last department, at Villaines, every one is a basket-maker, " and all the basket-makers belong to a co-operative society," Ardouin Dumazet remarks. + " There are no employers; all the produce is brought once a fortnight to the co-operative stores and there it is sold for the association. About 150 families belong to it, and each owns a house and some vineyards." At Fays-Billot, also in Haute Marne, 1500 basketmakers also belong to an association; while at Thierache, where several thousand men are engaged in the same trade, no association has been formed, the earnings being in consequence extremely low. 

Another xery important centre of petty trades is the French Jura, or the French part of the Jura Alountains, where the watch trade has attained, as known, a high development. When I visited these villages 

* Prof. IssaiefF in the Russian Mentoirs of the Petty Trades Commission {Trudy Kustarnoi Komviissii), vol. v. 

+ Knives are sold at from 6s. 4d. to 8s. per gross, and razors at 3s. 3d. per gross---" for export ". 

I Ardouin Dumazet, vol. i., p. 213 et seq. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 53 

between the Swiss frontier and Besangon in the year 1878, I was struck by the high degree of relative wellbeing which I could observe, even though I was perfectly well acquainted with the Swiss villages in the Val de Saint Imier. It is very probable that the machine-made watches have brought about a crisis in French watchmaking as they have in Switzerland. But it is known that part, at least, of the Swiss watch-makers have strenuously fought against the necessity of being enrolled in the factories, and that while watch factories grew up at Geneva and elsewhere, considerable numbers of the watch-makers have taken to divers other trades which continue to be carried on as domestic or small industries. I must only add that in the French Jura great numbers ■of watch-makers were at the same time owners of their houses and gardens, very often of bits of fields, and especially of communal meadows, and that the communal fruitieres, or creameries for the common sale of butter and cheese, are widely spread in that part of France. 

So far as I could ascertain, the development of the machine-made watch industry has not destroyed the small industries of the Jura hills. The watch-makers have taken to new branches, and, as in Switzerland, they have created various new industries. From Ardouin Dumazet's travels we can, at any rate, borrow an insight into the present state of the southern part of this region. In the neighbourhoods of Nantua and Cluse silks are woven in nearly all villages, the peasants giving to weaving their spare time from agriculture, while quite a number of small workshops (mostly less than twenty looms, one of 100 looms) are scattered in the little villages, on the streamlets running from the hills. Scores of small saw-mills have also been built along the streamlet Merloz, for the fabrication of all sorts of little pretty things in wood. At Oyonnax, a small town on the Ain, we have a big centre for the fabrication of combs, an industry more than 200 years old, which took 

154 FIELDS, FACTORIES AXD WORKSHOPS. 

a new development since the last war through the invention of celluloid. No less than lOO or 120 "masters'* employ from two to fifteen workers each, while over 1200 persons work in their houses, making combs out of Irish horn and French celluloid. Wheel-power was formerly rented in small workshops, but electricity, generated by a waterfall, has lately been introduced, and is now distributed in the houses for bringing into motion small motors of from one-quarter to twelve horse-power. And it is remarkable to notice that as soon as electricity gave the possibility to return to domestic work 300 workers left at once the small workshops and took to work in their houses. Most of these workers have their own cottages and gardens, and they show a very interesting spirit of association. They have also erected four workshops for making cardboard boxes, and their production is valued at 2,000,000 fr. ever>^ year.* At St. Claude, which is a great centre for briar pipes (sold in large quantities in London with English trademarks, and therefore eagerly bought by those Frenchmen who visit London, as a souvenir from the other side of the Channel), big and small workshops, both supplied by motive force from the Tacon streamlet, prosper by the side of each other. Over 4000 men and women are employed in this trade, while all sorts of small by-trad.=s have grown by its side (amber and horn mouth-pieces, sheaths, etc.). Countless small workshops are busy besides, on the banks of the two streams, with the fabrication of all sorts of wooden things: match-boxes, beads, sheaths for spectacles, small things in horn, and so on, to say nothing of a large factory (200 workers) where metric measures are fabricated for the whole world. At the same time thousands of persons in St. Claude, in the neighbouring villages and in the smallest mountain hamlets, are busy in cutting diamonds (an industry only 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. viii., p. 40. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 55 

fifteen years old in this region), and other thousands are busy in cutting various less precious stones. All this is done in quite small workshops supplied by waterpower. The extraction of ice from some lakes and the gathering of oak-bark for tanneries complete the picture of these busy villages, where industry joins hands with agriculture, and modern machines and appliances are so well put in the service of the small workshops. 

Finally, omitting a mass of small trades, I will only name the hat-makers of the Loire, the stationery of the Ardfeche, the fabrication of hardware in the Doubs, the glove-makers of the Isere, the broom and brush-makers of the Oise (valued at;^8oo,ooo per annum), and the house machme-kmttmg in the neighbourhoods of Troyes. But I must say a few words more about two important centres of small industries: the Lyons region and Paris. 

At the present time the industrial region of which Lyons is the centre * includes the departments of Rh8ne, Loire, Drdme, Sa6ne-et-Loire, Ain, the southern part of the Jura department, and the western part of Savoy, as far as Annecy, while the silkworm is reared as far as the Alps, the Cdvennes Mountains, and the neighbourhoods of Micon. It contains, besides fertile plains, large hilly tracts, also very fertile as a rule, but covered with snow during part of the winter, and the rural populations are therefore bound to resort to some industrial occupation in addition to agriculture; they find it in silk-weaving and various small industries. Altogether it may be said that the region lyonnaise is characterised as a separate centre of French civilisation and art, and that a remarkable spirit of research, discovery and invention has developed there in all directions---scientific and industrial. 

The Croix Rousse at Lyons, where the silk-weavers

* For further details see Appendix O. 

156 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

{canuts) have their chief quarters, is the centre of that industry, and in 1895 the whole of that hill, thickly covered with houses, five, six, eight and ten storeys high, resounded with the noise of the looms which were busily going in every apartment of that big agglomeration. Electricity has lately been brought into the service of this domestic industry, supplying motive power to the looms. 

To the south of Lyons, in the city of Vienne, handweaving is disappearing. " Shoddy " is now the leading produce, and twenty-eight concerns only remain out of the 120 fabriques which existed thirty years ago. Old woollen rags, rags of carpets, and all the dust from the carding and spinning in the wool and cotton factories of Northern France, with a small addition of cotton, are transformed here into cloth which flows from Vienne to all the big cities of France---20,000 yards of " shoddy " every day---to supply the ready-made clothing factories. Hand-weaving has evidently nothing to do in that industry, and only 1300 hand-looms are now at work out of the 4000 which were in motion ten years ago. Large factories, employing a total of 1800 workers, have taken the place of these hand-weavers, while " shoddy " has taken the place of cloth. All sorts of flannels, felt hats, tissues of horse-hair, and so on, are fabricated at the same time. But while the great factory thus conquered the city of Vienne, its suburbs and its nearest surroundings became the centre of a prosperous gardening and fruit culture, which has already been mentioned in chapter iv. The banks of the Rh6ne, between Ampuis and Condrieu, are one of the wealthiest parts of all France, owing to the shrubberies and nurseries, marketgardening, fruit-growing, vine-growing and cheese-making out of goats' milk. House industries go there hand in hand with an intelligent culture of the soil; Condrieu, for instance, is a famous centre for embroider}', which is made partly by hand, as of old, and partly by machinery. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 57 

In the west of Lyons, at TArbresles, factories have grown up for making silks and velvets; but a large part of the population still continue to weave in their houses; while farther west, Panissi^res is the centre of quite a number of villages in which linen and silks are woven as a domestic industry. Not all these workers own their houses, but those, at least, who own or rent a small piece of land or garden, or keep a couple of cows, are said to be well off, and the land, as a rule, is said to be admirably cultivated by these weavers. 

The chief industrial centre of this part of the Lyons region is certainly Tarare. Thirty years ago, when Reybaud wrote his excellent work, Le Coton, it was a centre for the manufacture of muslins and it occupied in this industry the same position as Leeds formerly occupied in this country in the woollen cloth trade. The spinning mills and the large finishing factories were at Tarare, while the weaving of the muslins and the embroidery of the same were made in the surrounding villages, especially in the hilly tracts of the Beaujolais and the Forez. Each peasant house, each farm and metayer ie were small workshops at that time, and one could see, Reybaud wrote, the lad of twenty embroidering fine muslin after he had finished cleaning the farm stables, without the: work suffering in its delicacy from a combination of two such varied pursuits. On the contrary, the delicacy of the work and the extreme variety of patterns were a distinctive feature of the Tarare muslins and a cause of their success. All testimonies agreed at the same time in recognising that, while agriculture found support in the industry, the agricultural population enjoyed a relative well-being. 

By this time the industry has undergone a thorough transformation, but still no less than 60,000 persons, representing a population of about 250,000 souls, work for Tarare in the hilly tracts, weaving all sorts of muslins for all parts of the world, and they earn every year 

158 FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

^480,000 in this way. Amplepuis, notwithstanding its own factories of silks and its wonderful apricot culture, remains one of the local centres for such muslins; while close by, Thizy is a centre for a variety of linings, flannels, " Peruvian serges," " oxfords," and other mixed woollenand-cotton stuffs which are woven in the mountains by the peasants. No less than 3000 hand-looms are thus scattered in twenty-two villages, and about ^^"600,000 worth of various stuffs are woven ever}' year by the rural weavers in this neighbourhood alone; while 15,000 power-looms are at work in both Thizy and the great city of Roanne, in which tvvo towns all varieties of cottons (linings, flannelettes, apron cloth) and silk blankets are woven in factories by the million yards. At Cours, 1600 workers are employed in making " blankets," chiefly of the lowest sort (even such as are sold at 2s. and even lod. a piece, for export to Brazil); all possible and imaginable rags and sweepings from all sorts of textile factories (jute, cotton, flax, hemp, wool and silk) are used for that industry, in which the factory is, of course, fully victorious. But even at Roanne, where the fabrication of cottons has attained a great degree of perfection and 9000 power-looms are at work, producing every year more than 30,000,000 yards---even at Roanne one finds with astonishment that domestic industries are not dead, but yield every year the respectable amount of more than 10,000,000 yards of stuffs. At the same time, in the neighbourhood of that big city the industry of fancy-knitting has taken within the last thirty years a sudden development. Only 2000 women were employed in it in 1864, but their numbers are now estimated at 20,000; and, without abandoning their rural work, they find time to knit, with the aid of small knitting-machines, all sorts of fancy articles in wool, the annual value of which is estimated at ;£"36o,ooo.* 

* Ardouin Dumazet, vol. viii., p. 266. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. 1 59 

It must not be thought, however, that textiles and connected trades are the only small industries in this locality. Scores of various rural industries continue to exist besides, and in nearly all of them the methods of production are continually improved. Thus, when the rural making of plain chairs became unprofitable, articles of luxury and stylish chairs began to be fabricated in the villages, and similar transformations are found everywhere. \ 

More details about this extremely interesting region will be found in the Appendix, but one remark must be made in this place. Notwithstanding its big industries and coal mines this part of France has entirely maintained its rural aspect, and is now one of the best cultivated parts of the country. What most deserves admiration is---not so much the development of the great industries, which, after all, here as elsewhere, are to a great extent international in their origins---as the creative and inventive powers and capacities of adaptation which appear amongst the great mass of these industrious populations. At every step, in the field, in the garden, in the orchard, in the dairy, in the industrial arts, in the hundreds of small inventions in these arts, one sees the creative genius of the folk. In these regions one best understands why France, taking the mass of its population, is considered the richest country of Europe.* 

The chief centre for petty trades in France is, however, Paris. There we find, by the side of the large factories, the greatest variety of petty trades for the fabrication of goods of every description, both for the home market and for export. The petty trades at Paris so much prevail over the factories that the average number of workmen employed in the 98,000 factories and workshops of Paris is less than six, while the number of 

* Some further details about the Lyons region and St. Etienne are given in Appendix O. 

l6o FIELDS, FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. 

persons employed in workshops which have less than five operatives is almost twice as big as the number of persons employed in the larger establishments.* In fact, Paris is a great bee-hive where hundreds of thousands of men and women fabricate in small workshops all possible varieties of goods which require skill, taste and invention. These small workshops, in which artistic finish and rapidity of work are so much praised, necessarily stimulate the mental powers of the producers; and we may safely admit that if the Paris workmen are generally considered, and really are, more developed intellectually than the workers of any other European capital, this is due to a great extent to the character of the work they are engaged in---a work which implies artistic taste, skill, and especially inventiveness, always wide awake in order to invent new patterns of goods and steadily to increase and to perfect the technical methods of production. It also appears very probable that if we find a highly developed working population in Vienna and Warsaw, this depends again to a very great extent upon the very considerable development of similar small industries, which stimulate invention and so much contribute to develop the worker's intelligence. 

The Galerie du travail at the Paris exhibitions is always a most remarkable sight. One can appreciate in it both the variety of the small industries which are carried on in French towns and the skill and inventing powers of the workers, x^nd the question necessarily arises: Must all this skill, all this intelligence, be swept away by the factory, instead of becoming a new fertile source of progress under a better organisation of production "■: must all this independence and inventiveness of the worker disappeeir before the factory levelling .' 

* In 1873, out of a total population of 1,851,800 inhabiting Paris, 816,040 (404,408 men and 411,632 women) were living on industry, and out of them only 293,691 were connected with the factories (graude Industrie), while 522,349 were living on the petty trades [petite indtistrie).---Maxime du Camp, Paris et scs Organes, vol. vi. 

SMALL INDUSTRIES AND INDUSTRIAL VILLAGES. l6l 

and, if it must, would such a transformation be a pro1 gress, as so many economists who have only studied "^ figures and not human beings are ready to maintain? 

At any rate, it is quite certain that even if the absorption of the French petty trades by the big factories were possible---which seems extremely doubtful---the absorption would not be accomplished so soon as that The small industry of Paris fights hard for its maintenance, and it shows its vitality by the numberless machine-tools which are continually invented by the workers for improving and cheapening the produce. 

The numbers of motors which were exhibited at the last exhibitions in the Galerie du travail bear a testimony to the fact that a cheap motor, for the small industry, is one of the leading problems of the day. Motors weighing only forty-five lb., including the boiler^ were invented to answer that want. Small two-horsepower engines, now fabricated by the engineers of the Jura (formerly watch-makers) in their small workshops, are another attempt to solve the problem---to say nothing of the water, gas and electrical motors. The transmission of steam-power to 230 small workshops which was made by the Societe des hnmeubles industriels was another attempt in the same direction, and the increasing efforts of the French engineers for finding out the best means of transmitting and subdividing power by means of compressed air, " tele-dynamic cables," and electricity are indicative of the endeavours of the small industry to retain its ground in the face of the competition of the factories. (See Appendix P.) 

II 