# What We Must Do

At the risk of repetition let me recapitulate : The main source of the difficulties that menace us is the growing inequality in the distribution of wealth. To this all modern inventiors seem to contribute, and the movement is hastened by politi- cal corruption, and by special monopolies established •by abuse of legislative power. But the primary cause lies evidently in fundamental social adjust- ments — in the relations which we have established between labor and the natural material, and means of labor — between man and the planet which is his dwelling-place, workshop and storehouse. As the earth must be the foundation of every material structure, so institutions which regulate the use of land constitute the foundation of every social organi- zation, and must aiFect the whole character and development of that organization. In a society where the equality of natural rights is recognized, it is manifest that there can be no great disparity in fortunes. None except the physically incapacitated will be dependent on others ; none will be forced to sell their labor to others. There will be differences in wealth, for tliere are differences among men as to

264

WHAT WE MUST DO. 265

energy, skill, prudence, foresight and industry ; but there can be no very rich class, and no very poor class ; and, as each generation becomes possessed of equal natural opportunities, whatever differences in fortune grow up in one generation will not tend to perpetuate themselves. In such a community, what- ever may be its form, the political organization must be essentially democratic.

But, in a community where the soil is treated as the property of but a portion of the people, some of these people from the very day of their birth must be at a disadvantage, and some will have an enormous advantage. Those who have no rights in the land will be forced to sell their labor to the land- holders for what they can get ; and, in fact, cannot 'live without the landlords' permission. Such a community must inevitably develop a class of mas- ters and a class of serfs — a class possessing great wealth, and a class having nothing ; and its political organization, no matter what its form, must become a virtual despotism.

Our fundamental mistake is in treating land as private property. On this false basis modern civili- zation everywhere rests, and hence, as material progress goes on, is everywhere developing such monstrous inequalities in condition as must ulti- mately destroy it. As without land man cannot exist ; as his very physical substance, and all that he can acquire or make, must be drawn from the

266 SOCIAL PROBLEMS. ,

land, the ownership of the land of a country is necessarily the ownership of the people of that country — involving their industrial, social and political subjection. Here is the great reason why the labor-saving inventions, of which our century has been so strikingly prolific, have signally failed to improve the condition of laborers. Labor-saving inventions primarily increase the power of labor, and should, therefore, increase wages and improve the condition of the laboring classes. But this only where land is free to labor ; for labor cannot exert itself without land. No labor-saving inventions can enable us to make something out of nothing, or in anywise lessen our dependence upon land. They can merely add to the efficiency of labor in working up the raw materials drawn from land. Therefore, • wherever land has been subjected to private owner- ship, the ultimate effect of labor-saving inventions, and of all improved processes and discoveries, is to enable landowners to demand, and labor to pay, more for the use of land. Land becomes more valuable, but the wages of labor do not increase ; on the contrary, if there is any margin for possible reductions, they may be absolutely' reduced.

This we already see, and that in spite of the fact that a very im]-)ortant part of the effect of modern invention has been by the improvement of trans- portation to open up new land. What will be the effect of continued improvement in industrial

WHAT WE MUSI DO. 267

processes when the land of this continent is all " fenced in," as in a few more years it will be, we may imagine if we consider what would have been the eifect of labor-saving inventions upon Europe . had no I^ew World been opened.

But it may be said that, in asserting that where land is private property the benefit of industrial improve Qients goes ultimately to landowners, I ignore facts, and attribute to one principle more im- portance than is its due, since it is clear that a great deal of the increased wealth arising from modern improvements has not gone to the owners of land, but to capitalists, manufacturers, speculators, rail- road owners, and the holders of other monopolies than that of land. It may be pointed out that the richest family in Europe are the Rothschilds, who are more loan-jobbers and bankers than land- owners ; that the richest in America are the Yander- bilts, and not the Astors ; that Jay Gould got his money, not by securing land, but by bulling and bearing the stock market, by robbing people with hired lawyers and purchased judges and corrupted legislatures. I may be asked if I attach no impor- tance to the jobbery and robbery of the tariff, under pretense of "protecting American labor"; to the jugglery with the monetary system, from the wild- cat State banks and national banking system down to the trade-dollar swindle ?

In previous chapters I have given answers to all

268 SOCIAL PEOBLEMS.

such objections ; but to repeat in concise form, my reply is, that I do not ignore any of these things, but that they in nowise invalidate the self-evi- dent principle that land being private property, the ultimate benefit of all improvements in production must go to the landowners. To say that if a man con- tinues to play at "rondo" the table will ultimately get his money, is not to say that in the meantime he may not have his pocket picked. Let me illustrate : Suppose an island, the soil of which is conceded to be the property of a few of the inhabitants. Tlie rest of the inhabitants of this island must either hire land of these landowners, paying rent for it, or sell their labor to them, receiving wages. As population increases, the competition between the non-land- owners for employment or tlie means of employment must increase rent and decrease wages until the non-landowners get merely a bare living, and the landholders get all the rest of the produce of the island. Now, suppose any improvement or inven- tion made which will increase the efficiency of labor, it is manifest that, as soon as it becomes general, the competition between the non-landholders must give to the landholders all the benefit. No matter how great the improvement be, it can have but this ultimate result. If the improvements are so great that all the wealth the island can produce or that the landowners care for can be obtained with one- half the labor, they can let the other half of the

WHAT WE MUST DO. 269

laborers starve or evict tliem into the sea ; or if they aro pious people of the conventional sort, who believe that God Almighty intended these laborers to live, though he did not provide any land for them to live on, they may support them as paupers or ship them off to some other country as the English Government is shipping the ''surplus" Irishmen. But whether they let them die or keep them alive, they would have no use for them, and, if improve- ment still went on, they would have use for less and less of them.

This is the general principle.

But in addition to this population of landowners and their tenants and laborers, let us suppose there to be on the island a storekeeper, an inventor, a gambler and a pirate. To make our supposition conform to modern fashions, we will suppose a highly respectable gambler — one of the kind who endows colleges and subscribes to the conversion of the heathen — and a very gentlemanly pirate, who flies on his swift cruiser the ensign of a yacht club instead of the old raw head and bloody bones, but who, even more regularly and efficiently than the old-fashioned pirate, levies his toll.

Let us suppose the storekeeper, the gambler and the pirate well established in business and making money. Along comes the inventor, and says : '*I have an invention which will greatly add to the efficiency of labor and enable you to greatly increase

270 SOCIAL PROBLEMS.

the produce of this island, so that there will he very- much more to divide among you all ; but, as a con- dition for telling you of it, I want you to agree that I shall have a royalty upon its use. '' This is agreed to, the invention is adopted, and does greatly increase the production of wealth. But it does not benefit the laborers. The competition between them still forces them to pay such high rent or take such low wages that they are no better off than before. They stiL. barely live. But the whole benefit of the invention does not in this case go to the landowners. The inventor's royalty gives him a great income, while the storekeeper, the gambler and the pirate all find their incomes much increased. The incomes of each one of these four, we may readily suppose, are larger than any single one of the landowners, and their gains offer the most striking contrast to the poverty of tlie laborers, w^ho are bitterly disappointed at not getting any share of the increased wealth that followed the improvement. Something they feel is wrong, and some among them even begin to murmur that the Creator of the island surely did not make it for the benefit of only a few of its inhabitants, and that, as the common creatures of the Creator, they, too, have some rights to the use of the soil of the island.

Suppose then some one to arise and say : ''What is the use of discussii^g surh abstractions as the land question, that cannot come into practical

WHAT WE MUST DO. 271

politics for many a day, and that can only excite dissension and general unpleasantness j and that, moreover, savor of communism, which as you laborers, who have nothing but your few rags, very well know is a highly wicked and dangerous thing, meaning the robbery of widow women and orphans, and being opposed to religion ? Let us be practical. You laborers are poor and can scarcely get a living, because you are swindled by the storekeeper, taxed by the inventor, gouged by the gambler and robbed by the pirate. Landholders and non-landholders, our interests are in common as against these vam- pires. Let us unite to stop their exactions. The store- keeper makes a profit of from ten to fifty per cent on all that he sells. Let us form a cooperative society, which will sell everything at cost and enable laborers to get rich by saving the storekeeper's profit on all that they use. As for the inventor, he has been already well enough paid. Let us stop his royalty, and there will be so much more to divide between the landowners and the non-landowners. As for the gambler and the pirate, let us put a sum- mary end to their proceedings and drive them off the island ! "

Let us imagine a roar of applause, and these pro- positions carried out. A\^hat then ? Then the land- owners would become so much the richer. The laborers would gain nothing, unless it might be in a

272 SOCIAL PROBLEMS.

clearer apprehension of tlie ultimate cause of their poverty. For, although by getting rid of the store- keeper, the laborers might be able to live cheaper, the competition between them would soon force them to give up this advantage to the landowners by taking lower wages or giving higher rents. And so the elimination of the inventor's royalty, and of the pickings and stealings of the gambler and pirate, would only make land more valuable and increase the incomes of the landholders. The saving made by getting rid of the storekeeper, inventor, gambler and pirate would accrue to their benefit, as did the increase in production from the application of the invention.

That all this is true we may see, as I have shown. The growth of the railroad system has, for instance, resulted in putting almost the whole transportation business of the country in the hands of giant mo- nopolies, who, for the most part, charge " what the traffic will bear," and who frequently discriminate in the most outrageous way against localities. The effect where this is done, as is alleged in the com- ])laints that are made, is to reduce the price of land. And all this might be remedied, without raising wages or improving the condition of hibor. It would only make land more valuable — that is to say, in consideration of the saving effected in trans- portation, labor would have to pay a higher premium for land.

WHAT WE MUST DO. 273

So with all monopolies, and tlieir name is legion. If all monopolies, save the monopoly of land, were abolished ; if, even, by means of cooperative socie- ties, or other devices, the profits of exchange were saved, and goods passed from producer to consumer at the minimum of cost ; if government were re- formed to the point of absolute purity and economy, nothing whatever would be done toward equali- zation in the distribution of wealth. The competi- tion between laborers, who, having no rights in the land, cannot work without some one else's permis- sion, would increase the value of land, and force wages to the point of bare subsistence.

Let me not be misunderstood. I do not say that in the recognition of the equal and unalienable right of each human being to the natural elements from which life must be supported and wants satis- fied, lies the solution of all social problems. I fully recognize the fact that even after we do this, much will remain to do. We might recognize the equal right to land, and yet tyranny and spoliation be continued. But whatever else we do, so long as we fail to recognize the equal right to the elements of nature, nothing will avail to remedy that unnatural inequality in the distribution of wealth which is fraught with so much evil and danger. Eeform as we may, until we make this fundamental reform our material progress can but tend to differentiate our 18

274: SOCIAL PROBLEMS.

people into tlie monstrously rich and the frightfully poor. Whatever be the increase of wealth, the masses will still be ground toward the point of bare subsistence — we must still have our great criminal classes, our paupers and our tramps, men and women driven to degradation and desperation from inability to make an honest living.
