# Social Evolution

The underlying cause of this failure of Collectivism to fulfil the conditions required for the establishment of a sound social system is that in concentrating its attention too exclusively upon the material evils existing in Society it loses sight of the spiritual side of the problem; for indeed, rightly considered, the evils which the Collectivist seeks to eradicate are ultimately nothing but the more obtrusive symptoms of an internal spiritual disease. Religion, art and philosophy have in these latter days suffered a serious decline, and the social problem, as popularly understood, is the attendant symptom.

The truth of this is borne in upon us when we view the present state of things from the standpoint of social evolution. We may then see how the growth of this external material problem coincides at every point with an internal spiritual decline, which separating religion, art and philosophy from life, has plunged Society into the throes of materialism, with its concomitants of ugliness and money-making, the reckless pursuit of which throughout the nineteenth century has left us for our heritage the Rings, Trusts and Monopolies which exploit Society to-day. For had the spiritual forces in Society not dwindled into impotence, social evolution would not thus have tended towards the ignoble ideal of Collectivism, but towards that finer individualism upon which the Socialism of the future must be founded.

To understand how these things are related we must go back to the time of the Renaissance in Italy, when the effort was made to graft the ideas of antiquity upon the Christian nations of Europe. The civilization of the Middle Ages was undoubtedly a lapse from that of Paganism, in that the freedom of thought formerly permitted was everywhere stamped out by the dogmas of Christianity. Yet, strangely enough, though from one point of view this lapse is to be regretted, it achieved a useful work, for in addition to bracing the moral fibre it became the means of enlarging the experience of the race. If it put boundaries to the intellect, it thereby enlarged the boundaries of the imagination. For it was precisely because in the Middle Ages men had their minds at rest about the thousand and one doubts and difficulties which beset the pursuit of the intellectual life, that they were able to develop that sense of romantic beauty which enabled them to build the cathedrals and abbeys which cover Europe.

And so, without committing ourselves to the unlikely theory that the Middle Ages were in every respect an ideal age, and while certain that in many respects that time suffers in comparison with our own, I think we must admit its superiority in some directions. It was greater than our own in that it possessed a "sense of the large proportions of things," and according to its lights it pursued perfection. For pursuit of religion and art were then the serious things of life, while commerce and politics, which have to-day usurped our best energies, were strictly subordinated to these attributes of perfection. The result of this condition of things, in its reaction upon Society, was that men found it possible to put into practice the dictum "Love thy neighbour as thyself"; and the principle of mutual aid became everywhere recognized in the structure of society. Each section of the community had its own appropriate duties to perform, while any confusion of function was jealously guarded against. In the cities the craftsmen and merchants were organized into guilds; the former for their mutual protection and education, and for the maintenance of fine standards of quality in production, and the latter for facilitating the exchange and distribution of merchandise. On the other hand, the land held in large fiefs under the feudal system by the nobility was formed and administered on a carefully organized system, while the political status of each individual was defined and guaranteed by feudal law and the universal code of morality supplied by the teachings, and enforced by the authority of the Roman Church.

Similarly, when we consider the external life of that age, what most impresses us is the marvellous and universal beauty of everything that has survived to our own time. The mediaeval period was not only great in its architecture, but the very humblest forms of craftsmanship, even the utensils, were beautiful. What a contrast to our day, where ugliness just as universal. It matters little where we look, in the city or the suburb, in the garden or in the house; at our dress or our furnishings; wherever modernity is to be found, vulgarity is also there. For this ugliness knows no exception save in the work of an insignificant and cultivated minority who are in conscious opposition to the present order of society. The Renaissance brought about this change by cutting at the roots of tradition[^1] which hitherto had been the support of the Middle Ages.

[^1]: "In a traditional art each product has a substance and content to which the greatest individual artists cannot hope to attain it is the result of organic process of thought and work. A great artist might make a little advance, a poor artist might stand a little behind, but the work as a whole was customary, and was shaped and perfected by a life-experience whose span was centuries."--"Mediaeval Art," by Professor W. R. Lethaby.

The sense of a consecutive tradition has so completely disappeared from modern life, that it is difficult for most of us to realize what it means. To greater or lesser extent in the form or custom or habit it is always present with us in debased forms. Yet this is a different thing from that living tradition which survived until the Renaissance, the meaning of which will be best understood by considering its relation to the arts.

Tradition then, in relation to the arts, may be defined as a current language of design, and, indeed, design in the Middle Ages bears a striking resemblance to the language of speech, in that the faculty of design was not as it is to-day, the exclusive possession of a caste--a body of men who give prescriptions for the craftsman to dispense--but, like language, was a common possession of the whole people. Certain traditional ways of working, certain ideas of design and technique were universally recognized, so that when the craftsman was called upon to design he was not, like his modern successor, compelled to create something out of nothing, but had this tradition ready to hand as the vehicle of expression understood by all. It was thus that the arts and crafts of former times were identical--the artist was always a craftsman, while the craftsman was always an artist. In the production of architecture no architect was employed in the modern sense to conceive and supervise every detail, since as every craftsman was in some degree an artist, it was the practice of each craft to supply its own details and ornaments, the craftsman being subject only to such general control as was necessary to secure a unity of effeCt. Architecture was thus a great co-operative art, the expression of the national life and character.

We realize, perhaps, more fully what tradition means when we compare the conditions of craftsmanship in those days with those which obtain to-day. The modern craftsman, deprived of the guidance of a healthy tradition, is surrounded on all sides by forms which have persisted, though debased and vulgarized, while the thought which created them has been lost. Consequently, he uses them not merely without any perception of their meaning, but as he does not realize that they ever had any meaning, he has as much chance of making himself intelligible as a man whose speech is a hopeless jargon of all tongues, and who has lost the capacity of realizing that any word he uses has ever actually had a definite meaning.

In these circumstances the designer or craftsman of to-day has a task of far greater magnitude to perform in order to produce creditable work than had his predecessors. It is not merely a question of possessing good taste, since before he can design he must recover for himself a language of expression. He must, therefore, be not merely an artist, but an "etymologist of forms," so to speak, in addition. How, then, can we wonder if little good work is produced?

Similarly we find the absence or degradation of tradition exercises its baneful influence in every department of life, for just as the craftsman cannot design beautifully because he has lost hold of a living tradition of design, so men are unnatural and inhuman because they have lost the art of right living, spontaneity and instinct having given place to conventions and fashions which exercise an intangible tyranny over their victims. Incidentally I would refer to the corroborative testimony of Mr. Bernard Shaw, who emphasizes the same truth in "Man and Superman." Mr. Shaw observes that English critics disapproved of Zola's works not because they considered them immoral, but because never having been taught to speak decently about such things, they were without a language by which to express their ideas.

To return to our subject: I said that the Renaissance, by cutting at the roots of tradition, brought about the changed state of things we see around us to-day. In seeking to liberate man from the fetters of the Middle Ages the Renaissance unfortunately destroyed what was really good and valuable.

Without minimizing in the least the ultimate benefits which the growth of the spirit of criticism stimulated by the Renaissance has in store for the human race, the development of that spirit has so far been attended with disastrous consequences. It is admitted that by undermining the authority of the Church and the Bible, criticism has largely destroyed the spirit of consecration to ideals, but it is not generally recognized that this same spirit operating upon the arts has brought about their decline, by separating them from life. First we see the gradual formation of canons of taste; then follows the growth of academies which impose rigid classical standards upon the people, and finally, tradition, which has hitherto been the source of vitality in the arts, is everywhere extinguished and a complete divorce is effected between Art and Life.

Art, ceasing to be the vehicle of expression for the whole people, now becomes a play-thing for the connoisseur and the *dilettante*, hidden away in galleries and museums, while Life, having lost the power of refined expression, crystallizes into conventions and becomes ugly in all its manifestations.

Simultaneously with this separation of art from life comes the separation of the artist from the craftsman. The fine arts having turned their back upon their humble brethren, craftsmanship everywhere degenerates into manufacture--uniformity having supplanted variety as the ideal of production, machines are invented for multiplying wares. Factories are built to contain the machinery, and labour is organized for the purpose of working it, while universal markets arise through the desire of avaricious manufacturers to find some temporary escape from the evils of over-production. And now, when supply has got ahead of demand, comes a complete divorce between production and use--owing to the circumstance that under such conditions, speculation, and not human need, becomes the motive force of production. Business and money-making become the all-absorbing interest of life, while democracy takes its rise in the seething discontent engendered by the growth of such conditions simultaneously with the degeneration of the Guilds into close corporations, and the subsequent exclusion of the journeyman, who is thereby deprived of the position he formerly held in the social scheme.

Such would appear to be the true interpretation of social evolution--Religion, Art and Philosophy having separated themselves from life, business, money-making and politics, hitherto subordinated to the pursuit of these other attributes of perfection, become the all absorbing interests of life. To this reversal of the natural order of things is to be attributed the growth of the social problem.

What the future has in store for us it is indeed difficult to say. It would seem that the present system is doomed to collapse through its own internal rottenness. Commercialism will reap as it has sown--a social catastrophe is clearly its fit and proper harvest. For a century we have been putting off the evil consequences of unregulated production by dumping our surpluses in foreign markets; but this cannot continue indefinitely, for the problem which on a small scale should have been boldly faced a century ago, when machinery was first introduced, will have to be dealt with on a gigantic scale. The foreigner, who was once our customer, has now become our competitor; and so instead of expanding markets we have to face the problem of contracting markets. The appearance therefore of a large and ever-increasing unemployed class becomes inevitable. The probability is that this phenomenon will make its appearance in America, where industrial conditions are fast ripening for such a catastrophe. Until quite recently America was occupied not so much in the production of wares as in manufacture of machinery. It is obvious that when all this machinery becomes engaged in aCtual production the output available for exportation will be enormously increased; and it is stated on very good authority that the competition we have already experienced from America is as nothing in comparison with what we are likely to encounter during the next few years. Meanwhile, the growth of Trusts, Combines and Monopolies, by eliminating the waste consequent upon competition, tends in the same direction.

Under these circumstances, we shall be well advised to prepare for eventualities. Though unable to save existing society, it may yet be possible to build something out of its ruins.
