# Unemployment and Waste

While it is necessary to bear in mind that the object of industry should not be employment, but rather the delivery of goods with a minimum expenditure of energy on their production, it is yet true that *at the moment* unemployment does form a practical problem demanding alleviating treatment. The word is generally used to indicate labour unemployment, but it is practically impossible to have any considerable volume of labour unemployment without a capital unemployment representing many times the production value of the idle labour.

To the extent that private capitalism in the old sense can be said to exist, this is just as great an evil to the capitalist as to the manual worker, although its incidence may not be so personal or so immediately tragic. It penalises his initiative, depletes his reserves, and finally bankrupts him; and the whole of the process is eventually an injury distributed over the community in general, resulting in a deterioration of moral, as well as in the more material evil of a rise in prices.

It is particularly important to notice the wastefulness of the system. A demand backed by money arises in the community for a particular class of goods; an enterprising manufacturer puts down a plant "at his own expense," as the misleading phrase goes (it is impossible for anyone to put down modern plant at the expense of other than the general consumer), and supplies the goods. This man is a public benefactor; he gives the public what it wants, and he gives it much quicker than it would be possible to get it by any other system, because one man can make a decision quicker than a dozen men, to say nothing of a Government Department. A trade slump comes; unemployment grows like a snowball, since every man thrown out of work is one man less receiving money, and therefore one man less in the market to buy goods; our manufacturer, though stiU willing and able to make his product, cannot sell it, and if this state of affairs continues for any length of time he is ruined. His business organisation is probably excellent, but it is broken up and bis plant dispersed, and when the trade revival comes a new plant and a new organisation has again to be constructed at the expense of the consumer.

Both the employer and the employed are so familiar with this cycle that both take steps which they imagine will protect them against its eSects, but which in fact only make confusion worse confounded. During times of brisk trade the employer charges the highest price he can obtain, or, in other words, delivers the minimum of goods for the maximum of money, and embodies his large profits in invisible reserves, with the result that the consumer is left without any effective demand (demand backed by money) as soon as his wages cease. The worker, sensing this, does in his sphere precisely the same thing---he uses his trade combinations to obtain the maximum amount of money for the minimum amount of production, not realising that this money simply goes into the cost of the product, which has to be paid by the community of which he forms so large a part. Since, superficially, it seems vital to the interest of both of them to keep the process moving as long as possible, the manufacturer is driven to sell, by advertisement or otherwise, useless or inferior and quickly worn-out articles where he cannot make a handsome profit on durable and well-finished production, the life and usefulness of which operate in the truest sense towards labour-saving.

Consider, then, the position at the present time. It is certain that both employers and employed are willing and able to work *on terms*; it is demonstrable without difficulty that the productive capacity of industry, with its labour, plant and organisation, greatly exceeds the consuming capacity of the nation, unless that consuming capacity is enormously and viciously inflated by waste, and especially the culminating waste of war; and yet it is patent that the needs of the individuals who comprise the community (whose collective needs are the only reason and justification for the existence of industry at all) are far, and even increasingly far, from being met. There is one possible explanation for this anomaly---the financial system, which ought to be an effective distributive mechanism for the whole possible production of society, is defective---it does not so arrange the prices of articles produced as to enable the extant purchasing power to acquire them.

Now without, for the moment, discussing the methods by which this defect can be remedied, let us imagine the remedy to be applied and consider its *immediate* effect on the unemployment problem. There are still millions of persons wanting goods; the productive system can make these goods; the persons who want them can buy them, and those who make them can be paid for them.

It seems obvious that an enormous stimulation to production would be provided---a stimulation which no mere propaganda on its desirability has ever succeeded in evoking; and that the immediate effect of this would be a radical diminution of unemployment.

Consider now the policy actually being pursued at this moment by the Government and the financial powers to deal with the problem. They can be summarised in one sentence---the reduction of costs, and more especially labour costs. But labour costs are wages and form by far the most important item in the total purchasing power *inside the country* available for the distribution of goods. Even supposing that retail prices were reduced in exact ratio to wage reductions, which is highly improbable or even impossible, how is the distribution of goods *to people in this country*, which is the true object of British industry, thereby advantaged? As the prices fall by this method, so the amount of money to purchase also falls, and we are as badly off as before, with the added complication of the discontent evoked by the reduction of wages.

It would seem, then, that although a reduction of prices *in relation to purchasing power* is not only vital in connection with the more fundamental problems of industry and society, but is the only effective method of dealing with the immediate problem of unemployment, we are not as a nation pursuing this policy, but rather one which, if not diametrically opposed to it, is yet wholly inapplicable to the situation. Is it impossible to obtain adequate recognition of fundamental remedies, and equally impossible to rouse the general public to a sense of tbe catastrophe towards which its passivity in the matter is hurrying it so swiftly?
