# *The Non-Resistant*

After the formation of The Non-Resistant Society on September 18, 1838, and the appearance in the columns of the Liberator of articles espousing the cause of Non-Resistance, objections began to arise as to the use of the space of the Liberator, for any subject not directly relating to slavery. On November n, 1838, Anne Warren Weston, an ardent apostle of both causes, wrote a letter to Mr. Garrison urging him to edit a monthly paper devoted to Non-Resistance on the ground of her belief that continued advocacy of Non-Resistance by the *Liberator* would damage the paper and cause vexation and discord among Abolitionists. After careful consideration of the matter the executive committee of the Non-Resistance Society accepted this point of view and determined upon the publication of a semi-monthly organ called *The Non-Resistant*. When it came to be published, however, it was found that it could not be gotten out oftener than monthly and its publication was continued from January, 1839, until the 29th of June, 1842, when it came to an end, like many another hopeful publication, because of lack of means---which is clear enough proof that the Non-Resistant movement was not identical with the Abolition movement itself, for the *Liberator* went its triumphal way until Abolition was achieved.

*The Non-Resistant* itself was a small folio nineteen inches by twelve, its four columns to the page being of the same width as those of the *Liberator* to permit the use of the same type in both publications. Its motto was, "Resist not evil---Jesus Christ." The burden of the editorial work was carried by Mrs. Maria Weston Chapman and Edmund Quincy, together with Mr. Garrison, who stated, however, at the end of *The Non-Resistant*'s existence, that he had not spent half a day during the whole period of the paper's life in preparing editorial matter for it. The bulk of the work was, therefore, done by Mrs. Chapman and Mr. Quincy, assisted by Charles K. Whipple, the Treasurer of the Non-Resistant Society, and by Henry C. Wright, one of Mr. Garrison's closest friends and associates. He was the sole missionary in the field and was authorized in 1 41 to go abroad as a "sort of missionary for the cause of peace, abolition, temperance, chastity, and a pure and equal Christianity"---surely a large order.

The success of the paper at the outset was very encouraging and was greater than its organizers had dared to hope. It paid for itself in 1840. At the outset Gerrit Smith, the rich Abolitionist of Peterboro, N. Y., sent $100 towards its support, and this was considered very daring because of the intense feeling among many of the Abolitionists that it was traitorous to the great cause to espouse any other. Arthur Tappan, the New York Abolitionist, who freed Mr. Garrison from jail at the time of his incarceration in Baltimore by paying his fine, on June 5, 1830, was so incensed by *The Non-Resistant* that he returned the copy sent to him and declared that he would have nothing to do with an organ that proclaimed itself against the use of force by the government and disseminated other non-governmental sentiments.

Curiously enough, it was the sending of Mr. Wright on his all-embracing mission to Europe which contributed more to the death of *The Non-Resistant* than anything else. He was that rare person among the Abolitionists, a good business man and organizer, and his absence in England seriously interfered with the development of the paper. But the chief cause was, as Mr. Garrison wrote to Mr. Wright, "our time, our means, our labors are so absorbed in seeking the emancipation of our enslaved countrymen that we cannot do as much specifically and directly for non-resistance as would otherwise be in our power to perform." The Non-Resistant Society kept alive until 1849, then it, too, gave up the ghost, and presumably for the same reason. With every year the anti-slavery struggle was growing bitterer and more thrilling, and was absorbing more and more the energy and the strength of all connected with it.
