# Bibliography

## Works About William Lloyd Garrison

An American Hero; the Story of William Lloyd Garrison. Written for Young People by Frances E. Cooke. London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co. 1888.

A Brief Sketch of the Trial of William Lloyd Garrison for an Alleged Libel on Francis Todd, of Massachusetts. [Baltimore, 1830?]

A Discourse on William Lloyd Garrison and the Anti-Slavery Movement. Delivered at the Church of the Saviour, Brooklyn, N. Y., by A. P. Putnam, June 1, 1879. Brooklyn, N. Y., Tremlett & Co., 1879.

The Garrison Mob in Boston, October 21, 1835. By Ellis Ames. (Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society. February, 1881, p. 340-344.)

Garrison, the Non-Resistant. By Ernest Howard Crosby. Chicago, The Public Publishing Co., 1905.

The Martyr Age of the United States. By Harriet Martineau. (London and Westminster Review, December, 1838. Reprinted in pamphlet form. New York: S. W. Benedict, 1839.)

A Memorial of William Lloyd Garrison from the City of Boston. Boston: Printed by order of the City Council, 1886.

The Moral Crusader, William Lloyd Garrison; a Biographical Essay founded on The Story of Garrison's Life told by his children. By Goldwin Smith. Toronto: Williamson & Co. 1892. Also New York: Funk & Wagnalls. *The difference between these editions is in the typography and the frontispiece portrait.*

A National Testimonial to William Lloyd Garrison. Boston: 1866. *An invitation to contribute towards a national testimonial of not less than fifty thousand dollars to William Lloyd Garrison. Signed by many subscribers and the Executive Committee, J. A. Andrew, chairman.*

Papers Relating to the Garrison Mob. Edited by Th. Lyman, 3rd. Cambridge: Welch, Bigelow & Co. 1870.

Rebels and Reformers, Biographies for Young People. By Arthur and Dorothea P. Ponsonby. London: G. Allen & Unwin Ltd. [1917.]

A Short Biography of William Lloyd Garrison. By V. Tchertkoff and F. Holah; with an Introductory Appreciation of his Life and Work by Leo Tolstoy. London: The Free Age Press. 1904.

A Sketch of the Character and Defence of the Principles of William Lloyd Garrison; being an Address delivered before the Managers of the "Maine Anti-Slavery Society," in Portland, Me., on the evening of the 1st of November, 1833, by One of the Board. Published by request. New York: Printed by Henry R. Piercy, 7 Theatre Alley. 1833.

Pamphlet, with imprint: Memoir of William Lloyd Garrison. *The author was James Frederic Otis, one of the founders of the American AntiSlavery Society and signers of the Declaration of Sentiments at Philadelphia in the month following the Address. (He was afterwards a backslider from the abolition faith, but survived emancipation, dying February 2, 1867.)*

The Story of a Noble Life: William Lloyd Garrison. By William E. A. Axon. London: S. W. Partridge & Co. 1890. (Onward Series.)

Tributes to William Lloyd Garrison at the Funeral Services, May 28, 1879. Boston: Houghton, Osgood & Co. 1879.

The frontispiece a profile view (heliotype) of the portrait bust by Anne Whitney.

Visit of William Lloyd Garrison to Manchester. Manchester, England, United Kingdom Alliance. [1867?]

William Lloyd Garrison. By John Jay Chapman. New York: Moffat, Yard & Co. 1913. Second edition, revised and enlarged. Boston: The Atlantic Monthly Press. 1921.

William Lloyd Garrison. By Lindsay Swift. Philadelphia: G. W. Jacobs & Company. 1911. (American Crisis Biographies.)

William Lloyd Garrison. By N. Moore. Boston: Ginn & Co. 1888.

William Lloyd Garrison. Von Georg Gizycki. Berlin: A. Asher & Co. 1890. *(Authorized German translation and condensation of the Story of His Life told by His Children.)*

William Lloyd Garrison. By Mary Howitt. *In the "People's Journal" for September 12, 19, 26, and October 3, 1846; with a portrait on wood drawn by H. Anelay, and probably engraved by W. J. Linton. The Memoir was reprinted in the "Pennsylvania Freeman" for March 25, 1847.*

William Lloyd Garrison; a Commemoration Discourse preached at the First Unitarian Church, Philadelphia. By Joseph May. Boston: G. H. Ellis. 1879.

William Lloyd Garrison and his Times. By Oliver Johnson; with an Introduction by John G. Whittier. Boston: B. B. Russell & Co. 1880. (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. 1881.)

William Lloyd Garrison, the Abolitionist; by Archibald H. Grimke. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. 1891.

William Lloyd Garrison; the Story of his Life told by his Children. New York: The Century Co. Volumes I, II, 1885, volumes III, IV, 1889. (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. 1894.) *The documentary Life by way of eminency. It contains six portraits of Garrison, and many more of his principal coadjutors on both sides of the Atlantic; maps, facsimiles of handwriting, etc. It is the quarry from which all subsequent lives have necessarily been constructed.*

## Writings and Speeches of William Lloyd Garrison

The Abolitionists and their Relations to the War; a Lecture at the Cooper Institute, New York, January 14, 1862. New York: E. D. Barker. 1862.

An Address delivered at the Broadway Tabernacle, New York, August 1, 1838, by request of the People of Color of that city, in commemoration of the complete emancipation of 600,000 slaves on that day in the British West Indies. Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1838.

An Address delivered before the Old Colony Anti-Slavery Society at South Scituate, Mass., July 4, 1839. Boston: Dow & Jackson. 1839.

An Address delivered before the Free People of Color, in Philadelphia, New York, and other places during the month of June, 1831. Boston: Stephen Foster. 1831.

Address delivered in Boston, New York and Philadelphia before the Free People of Color in April, 1833. New York: Printed for the Free People of Color. 1833.

An Address delivered in Marlboro Chapel, Boston, July 4, 1838. Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1838.

An Address on the Progress of the Abolition Cause, delivered before the African Abolition Freehold Society of Boston, July 16, 1832. Boston: Garrison & Knapp. 1832.

Address on the Subject of American Slavery delivered in the National Hall, Holborn, September 2, 1846. London: Richard Kinder. 1846.

Anti-Slavery Melodies for the Friends of Freedom., Prepared for the Hingham Anti-Slavery Society. Hingham, Mass.: Elijah B. Gill. 1843. *Set to music. The hymns 3, 18, 27, and lyrics on pages 64, 70, are Garrison's---the first hymn curiously razeed to fit the metre.*

Helen Eliza Garrison; a Memorial. Cambridge \[Mass.\]: Riverside Press. 1876.

The "Infidelity" of Abolitionism. New York. 1860.

Joseph Mazzini, His Life, Writings, and Political Principles; with an Introduction by William Lloyd Garrison. New York: Hurd & Houghton. 1872.

Lectures of George Thompson. Compiled from various English editions; also a Brief History of His Connection with the Anti-Slavery Cause in England, by William Lloyd Garrison. Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1836.

A Letter on the Political Obligations of Abolitionists. By James G. Birney; with a Reply by William Lloyd Garrison. Boston: Dow & Jackson. 1839.

Letter to Louis Kossuth concerning Freedom and Slavery in the United States. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1852.

Letters relative to the So-Called Southern Policy of President Hayes. By William E. Chandler, together with a Letter to Mr. Chandler of Mr. William Lloyd Garrison. Concord, N. H., Monitor & Statesman Office. 1878.

The Loyalty and Devotion of the Colored Americans in the Revolution and War of 1812. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1861. Reprinted in 1918 by Young's Book Exchange, New York.

"The New Reign of Terror" in the Slaveholding States, for 1859-60. Compiled by W. L. Garrison. New York: American Anti-Slavery Society. 1860. (Anti-Slavery Tracts, No. 4. New series.)

No Compromise with Slavery, an Address delivered in New York, February 14, 1854. New York: American Anti-Slavery Society, 1854.

No Fetters in the Bay State; Speech before the Committee on Federal Relations [of the Massachusetts Legislature], Thursday, February 24, 1859. Boston. 1859.

Principles and Mode of Action of the American Anti-Slavery Society; a Speech. London: William Tweedie. \[1853.\] (Leeds Anti-Slavery Series, No. 86.)

Proceedings at the Public Breakfast held in honor of William Lloyd Garrison, Esq., of Boston, Massachusetts, in St. James's Hall, London, on Saturday, June 29th, 1867. London: William Tweedie. 1868.

Proceedings of a crowded Meeting of the Colored Population of Boston, assembled the 15th July, 1846, for the purpose of bidding farewell to William Lloyd Garrison, on His Departure for England; with His Speech on the Occasion. Dublin: Webb & Chapman. 1846.

A Selection of Anti-Slavery Hymns, for the use of the Friends of Emancipation. Boston: Garrison & Knapp. 1834. Preface signed by William Lloyd Garrison.

Selections from the Writings and Speeches of William Lloyd Garrison. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1852.

Slavery in the United States of America, an

7 8 WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON

Appeal to the Friends of Negro Emancipation throughout Great Britain. London. 1833. Signed W. L. Garrison.

Sonnets and Other Poems. Boston: Oliver Johnson. 1843.

Southern Hatred of the American Government, the People of the North, and Free Institutions. Compiled by W. L. Garrison. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1862.

Speeches of William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass at the great Anti-Slavery Meeting held at Paisley, Scotland, 23d September, 1846. \[Glasgow?\] Alex. Gardner. 1846.

Spirit of the South towards Northern Freemen and Soldiers defending the American Flag against Traitors of the Deepest Dye. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1861.

Thoughts on African Colonization; or, An Impartial Exhibition of the Doctrines, Principles, and Purposes of the American Colonization Society; together with the Resolutions, Addresses, and Remonstrances of the Free People of Color. "Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee." "Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." Boston: Garrison & Knapp. 1832.

Three Unlike Speeches. By W. L. Garrison, G. Davis, A. H. Stephens. The Abolitionists and their relation to the War. New York: E. D. Barker. 1862. (Pulpit and Rostrum, numbers 26-27.)

West India Emancipation; a Speech delivered at Abington, Mass., on the first day of August, 1854. Boston. 1854.

William Lloyd Garrison on State Regulation of Vice. [New York? 1879?]

Words of Garrison; a centennial selection. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. 1905. *Compiled by his sons Wendell Phillips and Francis Jackson Garrison.*
