# The Servile State

The Servile State is that which was found among our forefathers everywhere. It is the Servile State in which we Europeans all lived when we were pagan two thousand years ago. For instance: In old pagan Italy before it became Christian, or in old pagan Greece---both of them the best countries in the world of their time and both of them, as you know, the origins of our own civilisation---most of the people you would have seen working at anything were slaves, and above the slaves were the owners: the free men.

Since we are talking of the political applications of political economy, we have to consider *human happiness,* which is the object of all human living; and when we talk of "advantage" or "disadvantage" in any particular economic state we mean its greater or less effect on human happiness.

The great disadvantage of the slave-owning state is clearly apparent: in it the mass of men are degraded: they are not citizens: they cannot exercise their own wills. This is so evident and great an evil that it must be set against ah the advantages we are about to notice. Slavery is a most unhappy condition in so far as it wounds human honour and offends human dignity; and that is why the Christian religion gradually dissolved slavery in the process of many centuries: slavery is not sufficiently consistent with the idea of man’s being made in the image of God. Slavery can also be materially unhappy, if the masters are cruel or negligent. The great mass of slaves in such a society might be, at the caprice of their masters, very unhappy; and under bad phases of those societies they *were* very unhappy.

But we must not be misled by the ideas that have grown up around the word "slave" in the modern mind. Because we have no one in England to-day who is called a slave and bought or sold as a slave, and no one is yet compelled by law to work for another man, therefore we regard slavery as something odd and alien; and because it is natural to dislike things which are odd and alien, unaccustomed, we think of slavery as something simply bad.

That is a great mistake. The Servile State had---and, if it comes back, will have again---two great advantages: which were *personal security* and *general stability.*

*Personal security* means a condition in which everybody, master and man, is free from grave anxiety upon the future: can expect regular food and lodging and a continuance of his regular way of life.

*General stability* means the continuance of all society in one fashion, without the violent ups and downs of competition and without the friction of unwilling, constantly interrupted labour---as in strikes and lock-outs.

In the Servile State work always got done and was done regularly. The owners knew "where they were." With so much land and so many slaves they were sure of a certain average annual produce. On the whole it was to the advantage of a man to keep his slaves alive and fairly well fed and housed. Also, the human relation came in, and a man and his slave, in the better and simpler forms of the Servile State, would often be friends and were usually in the same relation as people are to-day with their dependents. For instance: in well-to-do houses of the Servile State we know from history that certain slaves were often the tutors of the children, and thus had a very important and respectable position, and there were other slaves who acted as good musicians and architects and artists. There was always the feeling of a fixed social difference between slave and free, but this did not necessarily nor perhaps usually lead to great unhappiness.

This stability and security which slave-owning gave to all society (to the owned to some extent, and to the owners altogether) also produced a very valuable effect, which is, the presence of *leisure.* Because revenue was fairly certain, because this kind of arrangement prevented violent fluctuation of fortune, competition in excess, and the rest of it, therefore was there a considerable proportion of people at any time who had ample opportunity for study, for cultivating good tastes, for writing and building well, and judging well, and—what is very important—for conducting the affairs of the State without haste or the panic and folly of haste.

One alleged *economic* disadvantage of slave-owning must be looked at narrowly before we leave this description of the Servile State.

One often hears it said that slave labour is less productive than free labour, that is, labour working at a wage under Capitalism. People sometimes point to modem examples of this contrast, saying that places like the Southern States of America, where slave labour was used a lifetime ago, were less productive than the Northern States, where labour was free. But though this is true of particular moments in history, it is not generally true. Free labour working at a wage under the first institution of capitalism---when, for instance, a body of capitalists are beginning to develop a new country with hired free men to work for them---will be full of energy and highly productive. But when what is called "free labour"---that is, men without property working by contract for a wage—gets into routine and habit, it is doubtful whether it is more productive than slave labour. It is accompanied by a great deal of ill-will. There is perpetual interruption by strikes, and lock-outs,[^1] and the process of production cannot be as minutely and absolutely directed by the small and leisured class as can slave labour. *There is no reason why a free man working for another’s profit should do his best.* On the contrary, he has every reason to work as little as possible, while a slave can be compelled to work hard.

[^1]: A *Strike* is a modern English word (only used where the English language is spoken), and signifying the refusal of the Free labourers to sell their labour for the amount hitherto given. They cease work, thereby interrupting the profits of the Capitalist who furnishes them with food, clothing, etc., in the shape of wages. They do so in the hope of compelling him, by loss of profits during their idleness, to pay them more. A *Lock-out* is a modern English word now used all over the world to signify an action of the Capitalist refusing to pay his workmen what they have hitherto received, and hoping to starve them into accepting lower wages by "locking them out" of his factory until they submit. Strikes are only possible when the labourers have accumulated some capital on which to live during the struggle. This they accumulate by contributions to the common fund of a "Trades Union" while still in employment. A Lock-out is only possible from the fact that such funds are small and soon exhausted.

But whether slave labour be more or less productive is not so important as the two points mentioned above, of advantage and disadvantage. The disadvantages, as we have seen, are (1) that it offends our human love of honour and independence, degrading the mass of men, and (2) that it is so terribly liable to abuse in the hands of cruel or stupid owners, or in conditions where great gangs of slaves grow up under one owner who can know nothing about them personally and is therefore indifferent to their fate. The *advantages* are security and stability, running as a note throughout society and showing themselves especially in the leisure of the owning classes, with all the good fruits of leisure in taste, literary and artistic. It was a society based on slavery which produced what is perhaps the best fruit of leisure, and that is the profound and fruitful thinking out of the great human problems. All the great philosophy and art of the ancients was worked out by the free owners in the slave-owning states, and so was the best literature ever made.
